The Project Gutenberg EBook of History of Rome from the Earliest times
down to 476 AD, by Robert F. Pennell

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: History of Rome from the Earliest times down to 476 AD

Author: Robert F. Pennell

Release Date: November, 2004 [EBook #6989]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on February 20, 2003]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: Latin-1

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY OF ROME TO 476 AD. ***




This eBook was produced by Lynn Bonnett and especially to Teresa Thomason
of the Special Collections Department, Milner Library, Illinois State
University, Normal, IL, who helped to clarify a portion of the text.





ANCIENT ROME

FROM THE EARLIEST TIMES
DOWN TO 476 A.D.

BY ROBERT F. PENNELL

_REVISED EDITION_ WITH PLANS AND COLORED MAP




PREFACE.

This compilation is designed to be a companion to the author's History
of Greece. It is hoped that it may fill a want, now felt in many high
schools and academies, of a short and clear statement of the rise and
fall of Rome, with a biography of her chief men, and an outline of her
institutions, manners, and religion.

For this new edition the book has been entirely rewritten, additional
matter having been introduced whenever it has been found necessary to
meet recent requirements.

The penults of proper names have been marked when long, both in the
text and Index. The Examination Papers given are introduced to
indicate the present range of requirement in leading colleges.

The maps and plans have been specially drawn and engraved for this
book. The design has been to make them as clear and open as possible;
consequently, names and places not mentioned in the text have, as a
rule, been omitted.

ROBERT F. PENNELL. RIVERSIDE, CALIFORNIA, July. 1890.

[Illustration: GAIUS IULIUS CAESAR.]




ANCIENT ROME.



CHAPTER I.

GEOGRAPHY OF ITALY.


Italy is a long, narrow peninsula in the southern part of Europe,
between the 38th and 46th parallels of north latitude. It is 720 miles
long from the Alps to its southern extremity, and 330 miles broad in
its widest part, i.e. from the Little St. Bernard to the hills north
of Trieste. It has an area of nearly 110,000 square miles, about that
of the State of Nevada.

The Alps separate Italy on the north and northwest from the rest of
Europe. The pass over these mountains which presents the least
difficulties is through the Julian Alps on the east. It was over this
pass that the Barbarians swept down in their invasions of the country.
The Apennines, which are a continuation of the Alps, extend through
the whole of the peninsula. Starting in the Maritime Alps, they extend
easterly towards the Adriatic coast, and turn southeasterly hugging
the coast through its whole extent. This conformation of the country
causes the rivers of any size below the basin of the Po to flow into
the Tyrrhenian (Tuscan) Sea, rather than into the Adriatic.

Northern Italy, between the Alps and the Apennines, is drained by the
Padus (Po) and its tributaries. It was called GALLIA CISALPÍNA (Gaul
this side of the Alps), and corresponds in general to modern Lombardy.
The little river Athesis, north of the Padus, flows into the Adriatic.
Of the tributaries of the Padus, the Ticínus on the north, and the
Trebia on the south, are of historical interest.

The portion of Northern Italy bordering on the Mediterranean is a
mountainous district, and was called LIGURIA. In this district on the
coast were Genua and Nicaea. The district north of the Athesis,
between the Alps and the Adriatic, was called VENETIA, from which
comes the name Venice. Here were located Patavium (Padua), Aquileia,
and Forum Julii.

Gallia Cisalpína contained many flourishing towns. North of the Padus
were Veróna, Mediolánum (Milan), Cremóna, Mantua, Andes, and
Vercellae, a noted battle-field. South of this river were Augusta
Taurinórum (Turin), Placentia, Parma, Mutina, and Ravenna. The
Rubicon, a little stream flowing into the Adriatic, bounded Gallia
Cisalpína on the southeast. The Mucra, another little stream, was the
southern boundary on the other side of Italy.

CENTRAL ITALY, _Italia Propria_, or Italy Proper, included all of
the peninsula below these rivers as far down as Apulia and Lucania. In
this division are the rivers Tiber, Arnus, Liris, and Volturnus, which
empty into the Mediterranean, and the Metaurus, Aesis, and Aternus,
which empty into the Adriatic.

The most important subdivision of Central Italy was LATIUM, bordering
on the Tyrrhenian Sea. North of it on the same coast was ETRURIA, and
to the south was CAMPANIA. On the Adriatic coast were UMBRIA, PICÉNUM,
and SAMNIUM.

The cities of Latium were Rome, on the Tiber, and its seaport, Ostia,
near the mouth of the same river. Ten miles northwest of Rome was
Veii, an Etruscan city, and about the same distance southeast was Alba
Longa. Nearly the same distance directly south of Rome, on the coast,
was Lavinium, and east-northeast of Rome was Tibur. Neighboring to
Alba Longa were Tusculum and the Alban Lake. The Pomptine Marshes were
near the coast, in the southern part of Latium. Lake Regillus was near
Rome.

In Etruria were Florentia, Faesulae, Pisae, Arretium, Volaterrae,
Clusium, and Tarquinii; also Lake Trasiménus. In Campania were Capua,
Neapolis (Naples), Cumae, Baiae, a watering place, Herculaneum,
Pompeii, Caudium, Salernum, Casilínum, and Nola. The famous volcano of
Vesuvius was here, and also Lake Avernus.

In Umbria, on the coast, were Ariminum and Pisaurum; in the interior
were Sentinum and Camerínum. The river Metaurus, noted for the defeat
of Hasdrubal, was likewise in Umbria.

In Picenum was Ancona. In Samnium were Cures and Beneventum.

SOUTHERN ITALY included APULIA and CALABRIA on the Adriatic, LUCANIA
and BRUTTUM on the Tyrrhenian Sea.

Apulia is the most level of the countries south of the Rubicon. Its
only stream is the Aufidus, on the bank of which at Cannae was fought
a famous battle. Arpi, Asculum, and Canusium are interior towns.

In Calabria (or Iapygia) were the cities of Brundisium and Tarentum.

The chief towns in Lucania and Bruttium were settled by the Greeks.
Among them were Heracléa, Metapontum, Sybaris, and Thurii, in Lucania;
and Croton, Locri, and Rhegium, in Bruttium.

The islands near Italy were important. SICILY, with an area of about
10,000 square miles, and triangular in shape, was often called by the
poets TRINACRIA (with three promontories). The island contained many
important cities, most of which were of Greek origin. Among these were
Syracuse, Agrigentum, Messána, Catana, Camarína, Gela, Selínus, Egesta
(or Segesta), Panormus, Leontíni, and Enna. There are many mountains,
the chief of which is Aetna.

SARDINIA is nearly as large as Sicily. CORSICA is considerably
smaller. ILVA (Elba) is between Corsica and the mainland. IGILIUM is
off Etruria; CAPREAE is in the Bay of Naples; STRONGYLE (Strombóli)
and LIPARA are north of Sicily, and the AEGÁTES INSULAE are west of
it.




CHAPTER II.

THE EARLY INHABITANTS OF ITALY.


So far as we know, the early inhabitants of Italy were divided into three
races, the IAPYGIAN, ETRUSCAN, and ITALIAN. The IAPYGIANS
were the first to settle in Italy. They probably came from the north, and
were pushed south by later immigrations, until they were crowded into
the southeastern corner of the peninsula (Calabria). Here they were
mostly absorbed by the Greeks, who settled in the eighth and seventh
centuries all along the southern and southwestern coast, and who were
more highly civilized. Besides the Iapygians, and distinct from the
Etruscans and Italians, were the Venetians and the Ligurians, the
former of whom settled in Venetia, the latter in Liguria.

The ETRUSCANS at the time when Roman history begins were a powerful
and warlike race, superior to the Italians in civilization and the
arts of life. They probably came from the north, and at first settled
in the plain of the Po; but being afterwards dislodged by the invading
Gauls, they moved farther south, into Etruria. Here they formed a
confederation of twelve cities between the Arno and the Tiber. Of
these cities the most noted were Volsinii, the head of the
confederacy, Veii, Volaterrae, Caere, and Clusium. This people also
formed scattering settlements in other parts of Italy, but gained no
firm foothold. At one time, in the sixth century, they were in power
at Rome. Corsica, too, was at this time under their control. Their
commerce was considerable. Many well preserved monuments of their art
have been discovered, but no one has yet been able to decipher any of
the inscriptions upon them. The power of these people was gradually
lessened by the Romans, and after the fall of Veii, in 396, became
practically extinct.

The ITALIANS were of the same origin as the Hellénes, and belonged to
the Aryan race, a people that lived in earliest times possibly in
Scandinavia. While the Hellénes were settling in Greece, the Italians
entered Italy.

At this time the Italians had made considerable progress in
civilization. They understood, in a measure, the art of agriculture;
the building of houses; the use of wagons and of boats; of fire in
preparing food, and of salt in seasoning it. They could make various
weapons and ornaments out of copper and silver; husband and wife were
recognized, and the people were divided into clans (tribes).

That portion of the Italians known as the LATINS settled in a plain
which is bounded on the east and south by mountains, on the west by
the Tyrrhenian Sea, and on the north by the high lands of Etruria.

This plain, called LATIUM (flat country), contains about 700 square
miles (one half the size of Rhode Island), with a coast of only fifty
miles, and no good harbors. It is watered by two rivers, the Tiber,
and its tributary, the Anio. Hills rise here and there; as Soracte in
the northeast, the promontory of Circeium in the southwest, Janiculum
near Rome, and the Alban range farther south. The low lands (modern
_Campagna_) were malarious and unhealthy. Hence the first
settlements were made on the hills, which also could be easily
fortified.

The first town established was ALBA; around this sprung up other
towns, as Lanuvium, Aricia, Tusculum, Tibur, Praeneste, Laurentum,
Roma, and Lavinium.

These towns, thirty in number, formed a confederacy, called the LATIN
CONFEDERACY, and chose Alba to be its head. An annual festival was
celebrated with great solemnity by the magistrates on the Alban Mount,
called the Latin festival. Here all the people assembled and offered
sacrifice to their common god, Jupiter (_Latiaris_).

[Illustration: Latium]




CHAPTER III.

THE ROMANS AND THEIR EARLY GOVERNMENT.


We have learned the probable origin of the LATINS; how they settled in
Latium, and founded numerous towns. We shall now examine more
particularly that one of the Latin towns which was destined to
outstrip all her sisters in prosperity and power.

Fourteen miles from the mouth of the Tiber, the monotonous level of
the plain through which the river flows is broken by a cluster of
hills [Footnote: The seven hills of historic Rome were the Aventine,
Capitoline, Coelian, Esquiline (the highest, 218 feet), Palatine,
Quirínal, and Viminal. The Janiculum was on the other side of the
Tiber, and was held by the early Romans as a stronghold against the
Etruscans. It was connected with Rome by a wooden bridge (_Pons
Sublicius_).] rising to a considerable height, around one of which,
the PALATINE, first settled a tribe of Latins called RAMNES,--a name
gradually changed to ROMANS.

When this settlement was formed is not known. Tradition says in 753.
It may have been much earlier. These first settlers of Rome were
possibly a colony from Alba. In the early stages of their history they
united themselves with a Sabine colony that had settled north of them
on the QUIRÍNAL HILL. The name of TITIES was given to this new tribe.
A third tribe, named LUCERES, composed, possibly, of conquered Latins,
was afterwards added and settled upon the COELIAN HILL.

All early communities, to which the Romans were no exception, were
composed of several groups of FAMILIES. The Romans called these groups
GENTES, and a single group was called a GENS. All the members of a
_gens_ were descended from a common ancestor, after whom the
_gens_ received its name.

The head of each family was called PATER-FAMILIAS, and he had absolute
authority [Footnote: Called _patria potestas_.] over his household,
even in the matter of life and death.

The Roman government at first was conducted by these Fathers of the
families, with a KING, elected from their own number, and holding
office for life. His duties were to command the army, to perform
certain sacrifices (as high priest), and to preside over the assembly
of the Fathers of the families, which was called the SENATE, i. e. an
assembly of old men (_Senex_).

This body was probably originally composed of all the Fathers of the
families, but in historical times it was limited to THREE HUNDRED
members, holding life office, and appointed during the regal period by
the king. Later the appointment was made by the Consuls, still later
by the Censors, and for nearly one hundred years before Christ all
persons who had held certain offices were thereby vested with the
right of seats in the Senate. Hence, during this later period, the
number of Senators was greatly in excess of three hundred. The
Senators, when addressed, were called PATRES, or "Fathers," for they
were Fathers of the families.

The Romans, as we saw above, were divided at first into three tribes,
_Ramnes_, _Tities_, and _Luceres_ Each tribe was subdivided into
ten districts called CURIAE, and each curia into ten clans called GENTES
(3 tribes, 30 curiae, and 300 gentes). Every Roman citizen, therefore,
belonged to a particular family, at the head of which was a _pater-
familias_; every family belonged to a particular  _gens_, named
after a common ancestor; every gens belonged to a particular _curia_;
and every curia to a particular _tribe_.

We have learned that in the early government of Rome there was a king,
and a senate that advised the king. Besides this, there was an
assembly composed of all Roman citizens who could bear arms.
[Footnote: We must remember that at this time no one was a Roman
citizen who did not belong to some family. All other residents were
either slaves or had no political rights, i.e. had no voice in the
government.] This assembly of Roman citizens met, from time to time,
in an enclosed space called the COMITIUM, which means a place of
gathering or coming together. This was between the Palatine and
Quirínal hills near the FORUM, or market-place. This assembly itself
was called the COMITIA CURIÁTA, i.e. an assembly composed of the 30
curiae. This body alone had the power of changing the existing laws;
of declaring war or peace; and of confirming the election of kings
made by the senate. The voting in this assembly was taken by each
curia, and the majority of the curiae decided any question.




CHAPTER IV.

THE EARLY GROWTH AND INTERNAL HISTORY OF ROME.


The position of Rome was superior to that of the other towns in the
Latin Confederacy. Situated on the Tiber, at the head of navigation,
she naturally became a commercial centre. Her citizens prospered and
grew wealthy, and wealth is power. Her hills were natural strongholds,
easily held against a foe. Thus we see that she soon became the most
powerful of the Latin cities, and when her interests conflicted with
theirs, she had no scruples about conquering any of them and annexing
their territory. Thus Alba was taken during the reign of Tullus
Hostilius, and his successor, Ancus Marcius, subdued several cities
along the river, and at its mouth founded a colony which was named
OSTIA, the seaport of Rome.

At this time (about 625) the Roman territory (_ager Románus_)
comprised nearly 250 square miles, being irregular in shape, but lying
mostly along the southern bank of the Tiber and extending about ten or
twelve miles from the river. It was not materially increased during
the next two centuries.

The original founders of Rome and their direct descendants were called
PATRICIANS, i. e. belonging to the _Patres_, or Fathers of the
families. They formed a class distinct from all others, jealously
protecting their rights against outsiders. Attached to the Patricians
was a class called CLIENTS, who, though free, enjoyed no civil rights,
i. e. they had no voice in the government, but were bound to assist in
every way the Patrician, called PATRON, to whom they were attached. In
return, the latter gave them his support, and looked after their
interests. These clients corresponded somewhat to serfs, worked on the
fields of their patrons, and bore the name of the _gens_ to which
their patron belonged. Their origin is uncertain; but they may have
come from foreign towns conquered by the Latins, and whose inhabitants
had not been made slaves.

In addition to the clients there were actual slaves, who were the
property of their masters, and could be bought or sold at pleasure.
Sometimes a slave was freed, and then he was called a LIBERTUS
(freedman) and became the client of his former master.

As Rome grew into commercial prominence, still another class of people
flocked into the city from foreign places, who might be called
resident foreigners, corresponding in general to the _Metics_ at
Athens. Such were many merchants and workmen of all trades. These all
were supposed to be under the protection of some patrician who acted
as their patron.

These three classes, clients, slaves, and resident foreigners, were
all of a different race from the Romans. This should be constantly
borne in mind.

We have learned that Rome, as she grew in power, conquered many of the
Latin towns, and added their territory to hers. The inhabitants of
these towns were of the same race as the Romans, but were not allowed
any of their civil rights. Most of them were farmers and peasants.
Many of them were wealthy. This class of inhabitants on the _ager
Romanus_, or in Rome itself, were called Plebeians (_Plebs,
multitude). Their very name shows that they must have been numerous.
They belonged to no gens or curia, but were free, and allowed to
engage in trade and to own property. In later times (from about 350)
all who were not Patricians or slaves were called Plebeians.


THE ARMY.

Until the time of Servius Tullius (about 550) the army was composed
entirely of patricians. It was called a Legio (a word meaning
_levy_), and numbered three thousand infantry called _milites_,
from _mille_, a thousand, one thousand being levied from each tribe.
The cavalry numbered three hundred at first, one  hundred from each
tribe, and was divided into three companies called Centuries.

During the reign of Servius the demands of the plebeians, who had now
become numerous, for more rights, was met by the so called SERVIAN
reform of the constitution. Heretofore only the patricians had been
required to serve in the army. Now all males were liable to service.
To accomplish this, every one who was a land-owner, provided he owned
two acres, was enrolled and ranked according to his property. There
were five "Classes" of them. The several classes were divided into 193
subdivisions called "Centuries," each century representing the same
amount of property. In the first class there were forty centuries in
active service, composed of men under forty-six, forty centuries of
reserve, and eighteen centuries of cavalry.

In the second, third, and fourth classes there were twenty centuries
each, ten in active service, and ten in reserve. The fifth class had
thirty centuries of soldiers, and five of mechanics, musicians, etc.

The first four ranks of the troops were made up of the infantry from
the first class. All were armed with a leather helmet, round shield,
breastplate, greaves (leg-pieces), spear, and sword. The fifth rank
was composed of the second class, who were armed like the first,
without breastplate. The sixth rank was composed of the third class,
who had neither breastplate nor greaves. Behind these came the fourth
class, armed with spears and darts, and the fifth class, having only
slings.

Each soldier of the infantry paid for his own equipments; the cavalry,
however, received from the state a horse, and food to keep it.

This new organization of both patricians and plebeians was originally
only for military purposes,--that the army might be increased, and the
expenses of keeping it more equitably divided among all the people.
But gradually, as the influence of the wealthy plebeians began to be
felt, the organization was found well adapted for political purposes,
and all the people were called together to vote under it. It was
called the COMITIA CENTURIÁTA, i.e. an assembly of centuries. The
place of meeting was on the CAMPUS MARTIUS, a plain outside of the
city.

In this assembly each century had one vote, and its vote was decided
by the majority of its individual voters. The tendency of this system
was to give the wealthy the whole power; for since each century
represented the same amount of property, the centuries in the upper or
richer classes were much smaller than those in the lower or poorer
classes, so that a majority of the centuries might represent a small
minority of the people. The majority of the wealthy people at Rome
were still patricians, so the assembly was virtually controlled by
them. In this assembly magistrates were elected, laws made, war
declared, and judgment passed in all criminal cases.

[Illustration: CAMPANIA]




CHAPTER V.

THE DYNASTY OF THE TARQUINS.


Of the seven traditional kings of Rome, the last three were
undoubtedly of Etruscan origin, and their reigns left in the city many
traces of Etruscan influence. The Etruscans were great builders, and
the only buildings of importance that Rome possessed, until a much
later period, were erected under this dynasty. The names of these
kings are said to have been LUCIUS TARQUINIUS PRISCUS, SERVIUS
TULLIUS, his son-in-law, and LUCIUS TARQUINIUS SUPERBUS.

Under the first of these kings were built the fine temple of JUPITER
CAPITOLÍNUS, on the Capitoline Hill, and near by shrines to JUNO and
MINERVA. This temple to Jupiter was called the CAPITOLIUM, and from it
we get our word CAPITOL. It was looked upon as the centre of Roman
religion and authority, and at times the Senate was convened in it.

During this reign the famous CLOÁCA MAXIMA, or great sewer intended to
drain the Campagna, is also said to have been constructed. This sewer
was so well built that it is still used.

Under the second king of this dynasty, Servius Tullius, the city was
surrounded with a wall, which included the Palatine, Quirínal,
Coelian, and Aventine hills, and also the Janiculum, which was on the
opposite side of the river, and connected with the city by a bridge
(_pons sublicius_).

The establishment of the new military organization, mentioned in the
previous chapter, was attributed also to this king.

The pupil will notice the similarity between these reforms of Tullius
and those of Solon of Athens, who lived about the same time. Thus
early was the Greek influence felt at Rome.

During the reign of Tullius a temple in honor of DIÁNA was erected on
the Aventine, to be used by all the Latin towns.

Tarquinius Superbus added to the AGER ROMÁNUS the territory of the
city of GABII, and planted two military colonies, which were
afterwards lost. The dynasty of the Tarquins ended with the overthrow
of this king, and a Republic was established, which lasted until the
death of Julius Caesar.




CHAPTER VI.

THE CONSULS AND TRIBUNES.


At the close of the dynasty of the Tarquins, the regal form of
government was abolished, and instead of one king who held office for
life, two officers, called CONSULS, were elected annually from the
PATRICIANS, each of whom possessed supreme power, and acted as a
salutary check upon the other; so that neither was likely to abuse his
power. This change took place towards the close of the sixth century
before Christ.

In times of great emergency a person called DICTATOR might be
appointed by one of the Consuls, who should have supreme authority;
but his tenure of office never exceeded six months, and he must be a
patrician. He exercised his authority only outside of the city walls.
It was at this time, about 500, that the COMITIA CENTURIÁTA came to be
the more important assembly, superseding in a great measure the
COMITIA CURIÁTA.

We must remember that in this assembly all criminal cases were tried,
magistrates nominated, and laws adopted or rejected. We must not
forget that, since it was on a property basis, it was under the
control of the patricians, for the great mass of plebeians were poor.
Still there were many wealthy plebeians, and so far the assembly was a
gain for this party.

About this time the Senate, which heretofore had consisted solely of
Fathers of the families (_Patres_), admitted into its ranks some
of the richest of the landed plebeians, and called them CONSCRIPTI.
[Footnote: This is the origin of the phrase used by speakers
addressing the Senate, viz.: "_Patres (et) Consripti_"] These,
however, could take no part in debates, nor could they hold
magistracies.

In the Senate, thus constituted, the nomination of all magistrates
made in the Comitia Centuriáta was confirmed or rejected. In this way
it controlled the election of the Consuls, whose duties, we must
remember, were those of generals and supreme judges, though every
Roman citizen had the privilege of appealing from their decision in
cases which involved life.

Two subordinate officers, chosen from the patricians, were appointed
by the Consuls. These officers, called QUAESTÓRES, managed the
finances of the state, under the direction of the Senate.

The wars in which the Romans had been engaged, during the century
preceding the establishment of the Republic, had impoverished the
state and crippled its commerce. This was felt by all classes, but
especially by the small landed plebeians whose fields had been
devastated. They were obliged to mortgage their property to pay the
taxes, and, when unable to meet the demands of their creditors,
according to the laws they could be imprisoned, or even put to death.

The rich land-owners, on the other hand, increased their wealth by
"farming" the public revenues; i.e. the state would let out to them,
for a stipulated sum, the privilege of collecting all import and other
duties. These, in turn (called in later times Publicans), would extort
all they could from the tax-payers, thus enriching themselves
unlawfully. So the hard times, the oppression of the tax-gatherer, and
the unjust law about debt, made the condition of the poor unendurable.

The military service, too, bore hard upon them. Many were obliged to
serve more than their due time, and in a rank lower than was just; for
the Consuls, who had charge of the levy of troops, were patricians,
and naturally favored their own party. Hence we see that the cavalry
service was at this time made up entirely of young patricians, while
the older ones were in the reserve corps, so that the brunt of
military duty fell on the plebeians.

This state of things could not last, and, as the opportunity for
rebelling against this unjust and cruel oppression was offered, the
plebeians were not slow in accepting it.

The city was at war with the neighboring Sabines, Aequians, and
Volscians, and needed extra men for defence. One of the Consuls
liberated all who were confined in prison for debt, and the danger was
averted. Upon the return of the army, however, those who had been set
free were again thrown into prison. The next year the prisoners were
again needed. At first they refused to obey, but were finally
persuaded by the Dictator. But after a well-earned victory, upon their
return to the city walls, the plebeians of the army deserted, and,
marching to a hill near by, occupied it, threatening to found a new
city unless their wrongs were redressed. This is called the First
Secession of the Plebs, and is said to have been in 494.

The patricians and richer plebeians saw that concessions must be made,
for the loss of these people would be ruin to Rome. Those in debt were
released from their obligations, and the plebeians received the right
to choose annually, from their own numbers, two officers called
TRIBÚNI PLEBIS, who should look after their interests, and have the
power of VETOING any action taken by any magistrate in the city. This
power, however, was confined within the city walls, and could never be
exercised outside of them.

The person of the Tribunes was also made sacred, to prevent
interference with them while in discharge of their duties, and if any
one attempted to stop them he was committing a capital crime. Thus, if
the Consuls or Quaestors were inclined to press the law of debt to
extremes, or to be unjust in the levying of troops, the Tribunes could
step in, and by their VETO stop the matter at once.

This was an immense gain for the plebeians, and they were justified in
giving the name of SACRED MOUNT to the hill to which they had seceded.

The number of Tribunes was afterwards increased to five, and still
later to ten.




CHAPTER VII.

THE COMITIA TRIBUTA AND THE AGRARIAN LAWS.


The next gain made by the plebeians was the annual appointment from
their own ranks of two officers, called AEDILES. [Footnote: The word
"Aedile" is derived from _Aedes_, meaning temple.] These officers
held nearly the same position in reference to the Tribunes that the
Quaestors did to the Consuls. They assisted the Tribunes in the
performance of their various duties, and also had special charge of
the temple of Ceres. In this temple were deposited, for safe keeping,
all the decrees of the Senate.

These two offices, those of Tribune and Aedile, the result of the
first secession, were filled by elections held at first in the Comitia
Centuriáta, but later in an assembly called the COMITIA TRIBÚTA, which
met sometimes within and sometimes without the city walls.

This assembly was composed of plebeians, who voted by "tribes"
(_tributa_, meaning composed of tribes), each tribe being
entitled to one vote, and its vote being decided by the majority of
its individual voters. [Footnote: These "tribes" were a territorial
division, corresponding roughly to "wards" in our cities. At this time
there were probably sixteen, but later there were thirty-five. The
plebeians in the city lived mostly in one quarter, on the Aventine
Hill.]

The Comitia Tribúta was convened and presided over by the Tribunes and
Aediles. In it were discussed matters of interest to the plebeians. By
it any member could be punished for misconduct, and though at first
measures passed in it were not binding on the people at large, it
presently became a determined body, with competent and bold leaders,
who were felt to be a power in the state.

The aim of the patricians was now to lessen the power of the Tribunes;
that of the plebeians, to restrain the Consuls and extend the
influence of the Tribunes. Party spirit ran high; even hand to hand
contests occurred in the city. Many families left Rome and settled in
neighboring places to escape the turmoil. It is a wonder that the
government withstood the strain, so fierce was the struggle.

The AGRARIAN LAWS at this time first become prominent. These laws had
reference to the distribution of the PUBLIC LANDS. Rome had acquired a
large amount of land taken from the territory of conquered cities.
This land was called AGER PUBLICUS, or _public land_.

Some of this land was sold or given away as "homesteads," and then it
became AGER PRIVÁTUS, or _private land_. But the most of it was
occupied by permission of the magistrates. The occupants were usually
rich patricians, who were favored by the patrician magistrates. This
land, so occupied, was called AGER OCCUPÁTUS, or _possessio_; but
it really was still the property of the state. The rent paid was a
certain per cent (from 10 to 20) of the crops, or so much a head for
cattle on pasture land. Although the state had the undoubted right to
claim this land at any time, the magistrates allowed the occupants to
retain it, and were often lenient about collecting dues. In course of
time, this land, which was handed down from father to son, and
frequently sold, began to be regarded by the occupants as their own
property. Also the land tax (TRIBÚTUM), which was levied on all
_ager privátus_, and which was especially hard upon the small
plebeian land-owners, could not legally be levied upon the _ager
occupátus_. Thus the patricians who possessed, not owned, this land
were naturally regarded as usurpers by the plebeians.

The first object of the AGRARIAN LAWS was to remedy this evil.

SPURIUS CASSIUS, an able man, now came forward (486?), proposing a law
that the state take up these lands, divide them into small lots, and
distribute them among the poor plebeians as homes (homesteads). The
law was carried, but in the troublesome times it cost Cassius his
life, and was never enforced.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE CONTEST OF THE PLEBEIANS FOR CIVIL RIGHTS.


The plebeians were now (about 475) as numerous as the patricians, if
not more so. Their organization had become perfected, and many of
their leaders were persistent in their efforts to better the condition
of their followers. Their especial aim was to raise their civil and
political rights to an equality with those of the patricians. The
struggle finally culminated in the murder of one of the Tribunes,
Gnarus Genucius, for attempting to veto some of the acts of the
Consuls.

VALERO PUBLILIUS, a Tribune, now (471) proposed and carried,
notwithstanding violent opposition by the patricians, a measure to the
effect that the Tribunes should hereafter be chosen in the _Comitia
Tribúta_, instead of the _Comitia Centuriáta_. Thus the plebeians
gained a very important step. This bill is called the PUBLILIAN LAW
(_Plebiscítum Publilium_). [Footnote: All bills passed in the Comitia
Tribúta were called Plebiscíta, and until 286 were not necessarily
binding upon the people at large; but this bill seems to have been
recognized as a law.]

For the next twenty years the struggle continued unabated. The
plebeians demanded a WRITTEN CODE OF LAWS.

We find among all early peoples that the laws are at first the
unwritten ones of custom and precedent. The laws at Rome, thus far,
had been interpreted according to the wishes and traditions of the
patricians only. A change was demanded. This was obtained by the
TERENTILIAN ROGATION, a proposal made in 461 by Gaius Terentilius
Harsa, a Tribune, to the effect that the laws thereafter be written.
The patrician families, led by one Kaeso Quinctius, made bitter
opposition. Kaeso himself, son of the famous Cincinnátus, was
impeached by the Tribune and fled from the city.

Finally it was arranged that the Comitia Centuriáta should select from
the people at large ten men, called the DECEMVIRATE, to hold office
for one year, to direct the government and supersede all other
magistrates, and especially to draw up a code of laws to be submitted
to the people for approval. A commission of three patricians was sent
to Athens to examine the laws of that city, which was now (454) at the
height of its prosperity. Two years were spent by this commission, and
upon their return in 452 the above mentioned Decemvirate was
appointed.

The laws drawn up by this board were approved, engraved on ten tables
of copper, and placed in the Forum in front of the Senate-House. Two
more tables were added the next year. These TWELVE TABLES were the
only Roman code.

The DECEMVIRI should have resigned as soon as these laws were
approved, but they neglected to do so, and began to act in a cruel and
tyrannical manner. The people, growing uneasy under their injustice,
finally rebelled when one of the Decemviri, Appius Claudius, passed a
sentence that brought an innocent maiden, Virginia, into his power.
Her father, Virginius, saved his daughter's honor by stabbing her to
the heart, and fleeing to the camp called upon the soldiers to put
down such wicked government.

A second time the army deserted its leaders, and seceded to the SACRED
MOUNT, where they nominated their own Tribunes. Then, marching into
the city, they compelled the Decemviri to resign.

The TWELVE TABLES have not been preserved, except in fragments, and we
know but little of their exact contents. The position of the debtor
was apparently made more endurable. The absolute control of the
_pater familias_ over his family was abolished. The close
connection heretofore existing between the clients and patrons was
gradually relaxed, the former became less dependent upon the latter,
and finally were absorbed into the body of the plebeians. _Gentes_
among the plebeians now began to be recognized; previously only the
patricians had been divided into _gentes_.

Thus we see, socially, the two orders were approaching nearer and
nearer.

In 449 Valerius and Horatius were elected Consuls, and were
instrumental in passing the so called VALERIO-HORATIAN laws, the
substance of which was as follows:--

I. Every Roman citizen could appeal to the Comitia Centuriáta against
the sentence of any magistrate.

II. All the decisions of the Comitia Tribúta (_plebiscita_), if
sanctioned by the Senate and Comitia Centuriáta, were made binding
upon patricians and plebeians alike. This assembly now became of equal
importance with the other two.

III. The persons of the Tribunes, Aediles, and other plebeian
officers, were to be considered sacred.

IV. The Tribunes could take part in the debates of the Senate, and
veto any of its decisions.

Two years later (447), the election of the Quaestors, who must still
be patricians, was intrusted to the Comitia Tribúta. Heretofore they
had been appointed by the Consuls.

In 445 the Tribune Canuleius proposed a bill which was passed, and
called the CANULEIAN LAW, giving to the plebeians the right of
intermarriage (_connubium_) with the patricians, and enacting
that all issue of such marriages should have the rank of the father.

Canuleius also proposed another bill which he did not carry; viz. that
the consulship be open to the plebeians. A compromise, however, was
made, and it was agreed to suspend for a time the office of Consul,
and to elect annually six MILITARY TRIBUNES in the Comitia Centuriáta,
the office being open to all citizens. The people voted every year
whether they should have consuls or military tribunes, and this custom
continued for nearly a half-century. The patricians, however, were so
influential, that for a long time no plebeian was elected.

As an offset to these gains of the plebeians, the patricians in 435
obtained two new officers, called CENSORS, elected from their own
ranks every five years (_lustrum_) to hold office for eighteen
months.

The duties of the Censors were:-

I. To see that the citizens of every class were properly registered.

II. To punish immorality in the Senate by the removal of any members
who were guilty of offences against public morals.

III. To have the general supervision of the finances and public works
of the state. This office became in after years the most coveted at
Rome.

A few years later, in 421, the plebeians made another step forward by
obtaining the right of electing one of their number as Quaestor. There
were now four Quaestors.

Thus the patricians, in spite of the most obstinate resistance,
sustained loss after loss. Even the rich plebeians, who had hitherto
often found it for their interest to side with the patricians, joined
the farmers or lower classes.

Finally, in 367, the Tribunes Licinius and Sextius proposed and passed
the following bills, called the LICINIAN ROGATIONS.

I. To abolish the six military tribunes, and elect annually, as
formerly, two Consuls, choosing one or both of them from the
plebeians.

II. To forbid any citizen's holding more than 500 _jugera_ (300
acres) of the public lands, or feeding thereon more than 100 oxen or
500 sheep.

III. To compel all landlords to employ on their fields a certain
number of free laborers, proportionate to the number of their slaves.

IV. To allow all interest hitherto paid on borrowed money to be
deducted from the principal, and the rest to be paid in three yearly
instalments.

These rogations were a great gain for the poorer classes. It gave them
an opportunity for labor which had previously been performed mostly by
slaves. They were less burdened by debts, and had some prospect of
becoming solvent. But most of all, since the office of Consul was open
to them, they felt that their interests were now more likely to be
protected. The temple of CONCORDIA in the Forum was dedicated by
Camillus as a mark of gratitude for the better times that these
rogations promised.

The plebeians, however, did not stop until all the offices, except
that of _Interrex_, were thrown open to them. First they gained
that of Dictator, then those of Censor and of Praetor, and finally, in
286, by the law of HORTENSIUS, the plebiscita became binding upon all
the people without the sanction of the Senate and Comitia Centuriáta.
After 200 the sacred offices of PONTIFEX and AUGUR also could be
filled by plebeians.

Thus the strife that had lasted for two centuries was virtually ended;
and although the Roman patricians still held aloof from the commons,
yet their rights as citizens were no greater than those of the
plebeians.

To recapitulate:--

Full citizenship comprised four rights, viz.: that of trading and
holding property (COMMERCIUM); that of voting (SUFFRAGIUM); that of
intermarriage (CONNUBIUM); and that of holding office (HONORES).

The first of these rights the plebeians always enjoyed; the second
they obtained in the establishment of the COMITIA TRIBÚTA; the third
by the CANULEIAN BILL; the fourth by the LICINIAN and subsequent
bills.




CHAPTER IX.

EXTERNAL HISTORY.


The first authentic history of Rome begins about 400. The city then
possessed, possibly, three hundred square miles of territory. The
number of tribes had been increased to twenty-five. Later it became
thirty-five.

In 391 a horde of Celtic barbarians crossed the Apennines into Etruria
and attacked CLUSIUM. Here a Celtic chief was slain by Roman
ambassadors, who, contrary to the sacred character of their mission,
were fighting in the ranks of the Etrurians. The Celts, in revenge,
marched upon Rome. The disastrous battle of the ALLIA, a small river
about eleven miles north of the city, was fought on July 18, 390. The
Romans were thoroughly defeated and their city lay at the mercy of the
foe. The Celts, however, delayed three days before marching upon Rome.
Thus the people had time to prepare the Capitol for a siege, which
lasted seven months, when by a large sum of money the barbarians were
induced to withdraw.

During this siege the records of the city's history were destroyed,
and we have no trustworthy data for events that happened previous to
390.

The city was quickly rebuilt and soon recovered from the blow. In 387
the lost territory adjacent to the Tiber was annexed, and military colonies
 were planted at Sutrium and Nepete upon the Etruscan border, and
also at Circeii and Setia. [Footnote: These military colonies, of which
the Romans subsequently planted many, were outposts established to
protect conquered territory. A band of Roman citizens was armed and
equipped, as if for military purposes. They took with them their wives
and children, slaves and followers, and established a local government
similar to that of Rome. These colonists relinquished their rights as
Roman citizens and became Latins; hence the name LATIN COLONIES.]
The neighboring Latin town of TUSCULUM, which had always been a
faithful ally, was annexed to Rome.

The trying times of these years had caused numerous enemies to spring
up all around Rome; but she showed herself superior to them all, until
finally, in 353, she had subdued the whole of Southern Etruria, and
gained possession of the town of CAERE, with most of its territory.
The town was made a MUNICIPIUM, the first of its kind.

The inhabitants, being of foreign blood and language, were not allowed
the full rights of Roman citizenship, but were permitted to govern
their own city in local matters as they wished. Many towns were
subsequently made MUNICIPIA. Their inhabitants were called CIVES SINE
SUFFRAGIO, "citizens without suffrage."

During the next ten years (353-343) Rome subdued all the lowland
countries as far south as TARRACÍNA. To the north, across the Tiber,
she had acquired most of the territory belonging to VEII and CAPÉNA.

In 354 she formed her first connections beyond the Liris, by a treaty
with the SAMNITES, a race that had established itself in the
mountainous districts of Central Italy. This people, spreading over
the southern half of Italy, had in 423 captured the Etruscan city of
CAPUA, and three years later the Greek city of CUMAE. Since then they
had been practically masters of the whole of Campania.

After the treaty of 354 mentioned above, both the Romans and Samnites
had, independently of each other, been waging war upon the Volsci. The
Samnites went so far as to attack Teánum, a city of Northern Campania,
which appealed to Capua for aid. The Samnites at once appeared before
Capua, and she, unable to defend herself, asked aid of Rome.

Alarmed at the advances of the Samnites, Rome only awaited an excuse
to break her treaty. This was furnished by the Capuans surrendering
their city unconditionally to Rome, so that, in attacking the
Samnites, she would simply be defending her subjects.

Thus began the SAMNITE WARS, which lasted for over half a century with
varying success, and which were interrupted by two truces. It is usual
to divide them into three parts, the First, Second, and Third Samnite
Wars.


THE FIRST SAMNITE WAR (343-341).

The accounts of this war are so uncertain and confused that no clear
idea of its details can be given. It resulted in no material advantage
to either side, except that Rome retained Capua and made it a
_municipium_, annexing its territory to her own.


THE LATIN WAR (340-338).

The cities of the LATIN CONFEDERACY had been for a long time looking with
jealous eyes upon the rapid progress of Rome. Their own rights
had been disregarded, and they felt that they must now make a stand or
lose everything. They sent to Rome a proposition that one of the
Consuls and half of the Senate be Latins; but it was rejected. A war
followed, in the third year of which was fought the battle of
Trigánum, near Mount Vesuvius. The Romans, with their Samnite allies,
were victorious through the efforts of the Consul, TITUS MANLIUS
TORQUÁTUS, one of the illustrious names of this still doubtful period.
The remainder of the operations was rather a series of expeditions
against individual cities than a general war.

In 338 all the Latins laid down their arms, and the war closed. The
Latin confederacy was at an end. Rome now was mistress. Four of the
Latin cities, TIBUR, PRAENESTE, CORA, and LAURENTUM, were left
independent, but all the rest of the towns were annexed to Rome. Their
territory became part of the _Ager Románus_, and the inhabitants
Roman plebeians.

Besides acquiring Latium, Rome also annexed, as _municipia_,
three more towns, Fundi, Formiae, and Velítrae, a Volscian town.

LATIUM was now made to include all the country from the Tiber to the
Volturnus.

Rome about this time established several MARITIME (Roman) COLONIES,
which were similar to her MILITARY (Latin) COLONIES, except that the
colonists retained all their rights as Roman citizens, whereas the
military colonists relinquished these rights and became Latins. The
first of these colonies was ANTIUM (338); afterwards were established
TARRACÍNA (329), MINTURNAE, and SINUESSA (296). Others were afterwards
founded.

Later, when Antium was changed into a military colony, its navy was
destroyed, and the beaks (_rostra_) of its ships were taken to
Rome, and placed as ornaments on the speaker's stand opposite the
Senate-House. Hence the name ROSTRA.

At this time the FORUM, which had been used for trading purposes of
all kinds, was improved and beautified. It became a centre for
political discussions and financial proceedings. The bankers and
brokers had their offices here. Smaller _Fora_ were started near
the river, as the _Forum Boarium_ (cattle market) and the
_Forum Holitorium_ (vegetable market).

Maenius, one of the Censors, was chiefly instrumental in bringing
about these improvements.


THE SECOND AND THIRD SAMNITE WARS (326-290).

The results of the First Samnite War and the Latin War were, as we
have seen, to break up the Latin confederacy, and enlarge the domain
of Rome.

There were now in Italy three races aiming at the supremacy, the
Romans, the Samnites, and the Etruscans. The last of these was the
weakest, and had been declining ever since the capture by the Romans
of Veii in 396, and of Caere in 353.

In the contest which followed between Rome and the Samnites, the
combatants were very nearly matched. Rome had her power more compact
and concentrated, while the Samnites were superior in numbers, but
were more scattered. They were both equally brave.

During the first five years of the war (326-321), the Romans were
usually successful, and the Samnites were forced to sue for peace. In
this period Rome gained no new territory, but founded a number of
military posts in the enemy's country.

The peace lasted for about a year, when hostilities were again
renewed. By this time the Samnites had found a worthy leader in Gavius
Pontius, by whose skill and wisdom the fortune of war was turned
against the Romans for seven years (321-315). He allured the Romans
into a small plain, at each end of which was a defile (Furculae
Caudinae). On reaching this plain they found Pontius strongly posted
to oppose them. After a bloody but fruitless attempt to force him to
retreat, the Romans themselves were compelled to give way. But
meanwhile Pontius had also occupied the defile in their rear, and they
were obliged to surrender.

A treaty was signed by the Consuls Titus Veturius and Spurius
Postumius, according to which peace was to be made, and everything
restored to its former condition.

Such was the affair at the Caudine Forks (321), one of the most
humiliating defeats that ever befell the Roman arms. The army was made
to pass under the yoke,--which was made of three spears, two stuck
into the ground parallel to each other and the third placed above
them,--and then suffered to depart.

Rome was filled with dismay at the news. The citizens dressed in
mourning, business and amusements were suspended, and every energy was
devoted to repairing the disaster. Compliance with the terms of the
treaty was refused, on the ground that no treaty was valid unless
sanctioned by a vote of the people. It was determined to deliver the
Consuls who had signed it to the enemy.

Pontius, indignant at the broken faith, refused to accept them, and
the war was renewed. It continued for seven years, when (310) the
Samnites were so thoroughly whipped by QUINTUS FABIUS, then Dictator,
at LAKE VADIMÓNIS in Etruria, that they could no longer make any
effective resistance, and at last (304) agreed to relinquish all their
sea-coast, their alliances and conquests, and acknowledge the
supremacy of Rome.

During this war the Etruscans made their last single effort against
the Roman power. An expedition was sent in 311 to attack the military
colony of Sutrium, which had been founded seventy-six years before.
The Consul Quintus Fabius went to the rescue, raised the siege, drove
the Etruscans into the Ciminian forests, and there completely defeated
them.

Six years intervened between the Second and the THIRD SAMNITE WAR
(298-290). This time was employed by the Samnites in endeavoring to
unite Italy against Rome. They were joined by the UMBRIANS, GAULS, and
ETRUSCANS. The LUCANIANS alone were with Rome.

The war was of short duration, and was practically decided by the
sanguinary battle of SENTINUM (295) in Umbria. The Samnites, led by
Gellius Egnatius, were routed by the Roman Consuls QUINTUS FABIUS
MAXIMUS and PUBLIUS DECIUS MUS.

In this battle the struggle was long and doubtful. The Samnites were
assisted by the Gauls, who were showing themselves more than a match
for the part of the Roman army opposed to them, and commanded by
Decius. Following the example of his illustrious father, the Consul
vowed his life to the Infernal Gods if victory were granted, and,
rushing into the midst of the enemy, was slain. [Footnote: It is said
that the father of Decius acted in a similar manner in a battle of the
Latin war.] His soldiers, rendered enthusiastic by his example,
rallied and pushed back the Gauls. The victory was now complete, for
the Samnites were already fleeing before that part of the army which
was under Fabius.

The war dragged on for five years, when the Consul MANIUS CURIUS
DENTÁTUS finally crushed the Samnites, and also the SABINES, who had
recently joined them. The Samnites were allowed their independence,
and became allies of Rome. The Sabines were made Roman citizens
(_sine suffragio_), and their territory was annexed to the
_Ager Románus_. This territory now reached across Italy from the
Tuscan to the Adriatic Sea, separating the Samnites and other nations
on the south from the Umbrians, Gauls, and Etruscans on the north.

In 283, at Lake Vadimónis, the Romans defeated the Senonian and Boian
Gauls, and founded the military colony of SENA GALLICA.




CHAPTER X.

WARS WITH PYRRHUS (281-272).

In the early times of Rome, while she was but little known, it had
been the custom of Greece to send colonies away to relieve the
pressure of too rapid increase. We find them in Spain, France, Asia
Minor, and especially in Sicily and Southern Italy, where the country
became so thoroughly Grecianized that it was called MAGNA GRAECIA.
Here were many flourishing cities, as Tarentum, Sybaris, Croton, and
Thurii. These had, at the time of their contact with Rome, greatly
fallen from their former grandeur, owing partly to the inroads of
barbarians from the north, partly to civil dissensions, and still more
to their jealousy of each other; so that they were unable to oppose
any firm and united resistance to the progress of Rome. It had been
their custom to rely largely upon strangers for the recruiting and
management of their armies,--a fact which explains in part the ease
with which they were overcome.

Of these cities TARENTUM was now the chief. With it a treaty had been
made by which the Tarentines agreed to certain limits beyond which
their fleet was not to pass, and the Romans bound themselves not to
allow their vessels to appear in the Gulf of Tarentum beyond the
Lacinian promontory. As usual, the Romans found no difficulty in
evading their treaty whenever it should profit them.

Thurii was attacked by the Lucanians, and, despairing of aid from
Tarentum, called on Rome for assistance. As soon as domestic
affairs permitted, war was declared against the Lucanians, and the
wedge was entered which was to separate Magna Graecia from Hellas, and
deliver the former over to Rome.

Pretending that the war was instigated by Tarentum, Rome decided to
ignore the treaty, and sent a fleet of ten vessels into the Bay of
Tarentum. It was a gala day, and the people were assembled in the
theatre that overlooked the bay when the ships appeared. It was
determined to punish the intrusion. A fleet was manned, and four of
the Roman squadron were destroyed.

An ambassador, Postumius, sent by Rome to demand satisfaction, was
treated with insult and contempt. He replied to the mockery of the
Tarentines, that their blood should wash out the stain. The next year
one of the Consuls was ordered south.

Meanwhile Tarentum had sent envoys to ask aid of PYRRHUS, the young
and ambitious KING OF EPÍRUS. He was cousin of Alexander the Great,
and, since he had obtained no share in the division of the conquests
of this great leader, his dream was to found an empire in the West
that would surpass the exhausted monarchies of the East.

Pyrrhus landed in Italy in 281 with a force of 20,000 infantry, 3,000
cavalry, and 20 elephants. He at once set about compelling the
effeminate Greeks to prepare for their own defence. Places of
amusement were closed; the people were forced to perform military
duty; disturbers of the public safety were put to death; and other
reforms were made which the dangers of the situation seemed to demand.
Meanwhile the Romans acted with promptness, and boldly challenged him
to battle. The armies met in 280 on the plain of HERACLÉA, on the
banks of the Liris, where the level nature of the country was in favor
of the Greek method of fighting. The Macedonian phalanx was the most
perfect instrument of warfare the world had yet seen, and the Roman
legions had never yet been brought into collision with it.

The Romans, under LAEVÍNUS, were defeated, more by the surprise of a
charge of elephants than by the tactics of the phalanx. However, they
retired in good order. Pyrrhus is said to have been much impressed by
the heroic conduct of the foe, and to have said, "Another such victory
will send me back without a man to Epirus." He recognized the inferior
qualities of his Greek allies, and determined to make a peace. A
trusted messenger, CINEAS, was sent to Rome. He was noted for his
eloquence, which was said to have gained more for his master than the
sword. Through him Pyrrhus promised to retire to Epirus if safety was
guaranteed to his allies in Italy.

The eloquence of Cineas was fortified with presents for the Senators;
and though these were refused, many seemed disposed to treat with him,
when the aged APPIUS CLAUDIUS CAECUS (Blind) was led into the Senate,
and declared that Rome should never treat with an enemy in arms.

Cineas was deeply impressed by the dignity of the Romans, and declared
that the Senators were an assembly of kings and Rome itself a temple.

Pyrrhus then tried force, and, hastily advancing northward, appeared
within eighteen miles of the city. Here his danger became great. The
defection he had hoped for among the Latins did not take place, and
the armies which had been operating elsewhere were now ready to unite
against him. He therefore retired into winter quarters at Tarentum,
where he received the famous embassy of GAIUS FABRICIUS, sent to
propose an interchange of prisoners. It was in vain that bribes and
threats were employed to shake the courage of the men sent by the
Senate; and, on his part, Pyrrhus refused to grant the desired
exchange.

Many Italian nations now joined Pyrrhus, and hostilities were renewed.
The armies again met in 279 on the plain of ASCULUM, in Apulia; but
though the Romans were defeated, it was only another of those Pyrrhic
victories which were almost as disastrous as defeat.

The same year Pyrrhus retired to Sicily to defend Syracuse against the
Carthaginians, who were allied to the Romans. He remained on the
island three years. Upon his return to Italy he met the Romans for the
last time in 274, near BENEVENTUM, where he was defeated by the Consul
MANIUS CURIOUS DENTÁTUS. The Romans had by this time become accustomed
to the elephants, and used burning arrows against them. The wounded
beasts became furious and unmanageable, and threw the army into
disorder. With this battle ended the career of Pyrrhus in Italy. He
returned home, and two years later was accidentally killed by a woman
at Argos.

The departure of Pyrrhus left all Italy at the mercy of Rome. Two
years later, in 272, the garrison at Tarentum surrendered, the city
walls were demolished, and the fleet given up.




CHAPTER XI.

DIVISIONS OF THE ROMAN TERRITORY.--NOTED MEN OF THE PERIOD.


Rome was now mistress of all Italy south of the Arnus and Aesis. This
country was divided into two parts.

I. The AGER ROMÁNUS, including about one quarter of the whole, bounded
on the north by CAERE, on the south by FORMIAE, and on the east by the
APENNINES.

II. The DEPENDENT COMMUNITIES.

The _Ager Románus_ was subdivided, for voting and financial
purposes, into thirty-three, afterwards thirty-five districts
(tribes), four of which were in Rome. The elections were all held at
Rome.

These districts were made up,--

a. Of ROME.

b. Of the ROMAN COLONIES, mostly maritime, now numbering seven, but
finally increased to thirty-five.

c. Of the MUNICIPIA (towns bound to service).

d. Of the PRAEFECTÚRAE (towns governed by a praefect, who was sent
from Rome and appointed by the Praetor).

The DEPENDENT COMMUNITIES were made up,--

a. Of the LATIN (military) COLONIES, now numbering twenty-two,
afterwards increased to thirty-five.

b. Of the ALLIES of Rome (_Socii_), whose cities and adjoining
territory composed more than one half of the country controlled by
Rome.

These allies were allowed local government, were not obliged to pay
tribute, but were called upon to furnish their proportion of troops
for the Roman army.

The inhabitants of this country were divided into five classes, viz.--

a. Those who possessed both PUBLIC and PRIVATE RIGHTS as citizens,
i. e. FULL RIGHTS. [Footnote: Public rights consisted of the _jus
suffragii_ (right of voting at Rome); _jus honorum_ (right of
holding office), and _jus provocationis_ (right of appeal).
Private rights were _jus connubii_ (right of intermarriage); and
_jus commercii_ (right of trading and holding property). Full
rights were acquired either by birth or gift. A child born of parents,
both of whom enjoyed the _jus connubii_, was a Roman citizen with
full rights. Foreigners were sometimes presented with citizenship
(_civitas_)]

b. Those who were subjects and did not possess full rights.

c. Those who were ALLIES (_Socii_).

d. Those who were SLAVES, who possessed no rights.

e. Those who were RESIDENT FOREIGNERS, who possessed the right of
trading.

To class _a_ belonged the citizens of Rome, of the Roman
colonies, and of some of the Municipia.

To class _b_ belonged the citizens of most of the Municipia, who
possessed only private rights, the citizens of all the _Praefectúrae_,
and the citizens of all the Latin colonies.

ROADS.

Even at this early date, the necessity of easy communication with the
capital seems to have been well understood. Roads were pushed in every
direction,--broad, level ways, over which armies might be marched or
intelligence quickly carried. They were chains which bound her
possessions indissolubly together. Some of them remain today a
monument of Roman thoroughness, enterprise, and sagacity,--the wonder
and admiration of modern road-builders. By these means did Rome fasten
together the constantly increasing fabric of her empire, so that not
even the successes of Hannibal caused more than a momentary shaking of
fidelity, for which ample punishment was both speedy and certain.


NOTED MEN.

The three most noted men of the period embraced in the two preceding
chapters were Appius Claudius, the Censor and patrician; and Manius
Curius Dentátus and Gaius Fabricius, plebeians.

We have seen that all plebeians who were land-owners belonged to one
of the tribes, and could vote in the _Comitia Tribúta_; this,
however, shut out the plebeians of the city who owned no land, and
also the freedmen, who were generally educated and professional men,
such as doctors, teachers, etc.

APPIUS CLAUDIUS as Censor, in 312, deprived the landowners of the
exclusive privilege of voting in the _Comitia Tribúta_, and gave
to property owners of any sort the right to vote. Eight years later
this law was modified, so that it applied to the four city tribes
alone, and the thirty-one rural tribes had for their basis landed
property only.

During the censorship of Appius, Rome had its first regular water
supply by the Appian aqueduct. The first military road, the VIA APPIA,
was built under his supervision. This road ran at first from Rome as
far as Capua. It was constructed so well that many parts of it are
today in good condition. The road was afterward extended to
Brundisium, through Venusia and Tarentum.

MANIUS CURIUS DENTÁTUS was a peasant, a contemporary of Appius, and
his opponent in many ways. He was a strong friend of the plebeians. He
obtained for the soldiers large assignments of the _Ager
Publicus_. He drained the low and swampy country near Reáte by a
canal. He was the conqueror of Pyrrhus. A man of sterling qualities,
frugal and unostentatious, after his public life he retired to his
farm and spent the remainder of his days in seclusion as a simple
peasant.

GAIUS FABRICIUS, like Dentátus, was from the peasants. He was a
Hernican. As a soldier he was successful. As a statesman he was
incorruptible, and of great use to his country. Previous to the battle
of Asculum, Pyrrhus attempted to bribe him by large sums of money,
and, failing in this, thought to frighten him by hiding an elephant
behind a curtain; the curtain was suddenly removed, but Fabricius,
though immediately under the elephant's trunk, stood unmoved.

In this generation we find Roman character at its best. Wealth had not
flowed into the state in such large quantities as to corrupt it. The
great mass of the people were peasants, small land-owners, of frugal
habits and moral qualities. But comparatively few owned large estates
as yet, or possessed large tracts of the _Ager Publicus_. A
century later, when most of the available land in the peninsula was
held by the wealthy and farmed by slaves, we find a great change.

The fall of TARENTUM marks an important era in Roman history. Large
treasures were obtained from this and other Greek cities in Southern
Italy. Luxury became more fashionable; morals began to degenerate.
Greed for wealth obtained by plunder began to get possession of the
Romans. From now on the moral tone of the people continued to
degenerate in proportion as their empire increased.




CHAPTER XII.

FOREIGN CONQUEST.


ROME AND CARTHAGE.--FIRST PUNIC WAR. (264-241.) [Footnote: The
word "Punic" is derived from _Phoenici_. The Carthaginians were
said to have come originally from PHOENICIA, on the eastern coast of
the Mediterranean. Their first ruler was Dido. The Latin student is of
course familiar with Virgil's story of Dido and Aenéas.]

While Rome was gradually enlarging her territory from Latium to the
Straits of Messána, on the other shore of the Mediterranean, opposite
Italy and less than one hundred miles from Sicily, sprang up, through
industry and commerce, the Carthaginian power.

Like Rome, Carthage had an obscure beginning. As in the case of Rome,
it required centuries to gain her power.

It was the policy of Carthage to make a successful revolt of her
subdued allies an impossibility, by consuming all their energies in
the support of her immense population and the equipment of her
numerous fleets and armies. Hence all the surrounding tribes, once
wandering nomads, were forced to become tillers of the soil; and, with
colonies sent out by herself, they formed the so called Libyo-
Phoenician population, open to the attack of all, and incapable of
defence. Thus the country around Carthage was weak, and the moment a
foreign enemy landed in Africa the war was merely a siege of its chief
city.

The power of Carthage lay in her commerce. Through her hands passed
the gold and pearls of the Orient; the famous Tyrian purple; ivory,
slaves, and incense of Arabia; the silver of Spain; the bronze of
Cyprus; and the iron of Elba.

But the harsh and gloomy character of the people, their cruel
religion, which sanctioned human sacrifice, their disregard of the
rights of others, their well known treachery, all shut them off from
the higher civilization of Rome and Greece.

The government of Carthage was an ARISTOCRACY. A council composed of a
few of high birth, and another composed of the very wealthy, managed
the state. Only in times of extraordinary danger were the people
summoned and consulted.

Rome had made two treaties with Carthage; one immediately after the
establishment of the Republic, in 500, the other about 340. By these
treaties commerce was allowed between Rome and its dependencies and
Carthage and her possessions in Sicily, Sardinia, and Corsica. But the
Romans were not to trade in Spain, or sail beyond the Bay of Carthage.

In leaving Sicily, Pyrrhus had exclaimed, "What a fine battle-field
for Rome and Carthage!" If Carthage were mistress of this island, Rome
would be shut up in her peninsula; if Rome were in possession of it,
"the commerce of Carthage would be intercepted, and a good breeze of
one night would carry the Roman fleets to her walls".

At this time the island was shared by three powers,--HIERO, king of
Syracuse, the CARTHAGINIANS, and the MAMERTINES, a band of brigands
who came from Campania. The latter, making Messána their head-
quarters, had been pillaging all of the island that they could reach.
Being shut up in Messána by Hiero, they asked aid of Rome on the
ground that they were from Campania. Although Rome was in alliance
with Hiero, and had but recently executed 300 mercenaries for doing in
Rhegium what the Mamertines had done in Sicily,--she determined to aid
them, for Sicily was a rich and tempting prey.

Meanwhile, however, through the intervention of the Carthaginians, a
truce had been formed between Hiero and the brigands, and the siege of
Messána was raised. The city itself was occupied by a fleet and
garrison of Carthaginians under HANNO, The Romans, though the
Mamertines no longer needed their aid, landed at Messána and dislodged
the Carthaginians,

Thus opened the FIRST PUNIC WAR. The Romans at once formed a double
alliance with Syracuse and Messána, thus gaining control of the
eastern coast of Sicily and getting their first foothold outside of
Italy.

The most important inland city of Sicily was AGRIGENTUM. Here the
Carthaginians the next year (262) concentrated their forces under
HANNIBAL, son of Cisco. The Romans besieged the city, but were
themselves cut off from supplies by Hanno, who landed at Heracléa in
their rear. Both besieged and besiegers suffered much. At last a
battle was fought (262), in which the Romans were victorious, owing to
their superior infantry. Agrigentum fell, and only a few strongholds
on the coast were left to the Carthaginians.

The Romans now began to feel the need of a fleet. That of Carthage
ruled the sea without a rival: it notonly controlled many of the
seaports of Sicily, but also threatened Italy itself. With their usual
energy, the Romans began the work. [Footnote: In 259, three years
previous to the battle of Ecnomus, the Romans under Lucius Scipio
captured Blesia, a seaport of Corsica, and established there a naval
station.] A wrecked Carthaginian vessel was taken as a model, and by
the spring of 260 a navy of 120 sail was ready for sea.

The ships were made the more formidable by a heavy iron beak, for the
purpose of running down and sinking the enemy's vessels; a kind of
hanging stage was also placed on the prow of the ship, which could be
lowered in front or on either side. It was furnished on both sides
with parapets, and had space for two men in front. On coming to close
quarters with the enemy, this stage was quickly lowered and fastened
to the opposing ship by means of grappling irons; thus the Roman
marines were enabled to board with ease their opponents' ship, and
fight as if on land.

Four naval battles now followed: 1st, near LIPARA (260); 2d, off MYLAE
(260); 3d, off TYNDARIS (257); 4th, off ECNOMUS (256).

In the first of these only seventeen ships of the Romans were engaged
under the CONSUL GNAEUS CORNELIUS SCIPIO. The fleet with its commander
was captured.

In the second engagement, off Mylae, all the Roman fleet under GAIUS
DUILIUS took part. The Carthaginians were led by Hannibal, son of
Gisco. The newly invented stages or boarding-bridges of the Romans
were found to be very effective. The enemy could not approach near
without these bridges descending with their grappling irons and
holding them fast to the Romans. The Carthaginians were defeated, with
the loss of nearly half their fleet.

A bronze column, ornamented with the beaks of the captured vessels,
was erected at Rome in honor of this victory of Duilius. The pedestal
of it is still standing, and on it are inscribed some of the oldest
inscriptions in the Latin language.

The third engagement, off Tyndaris, resulted in a drawn battle.

In the fourth engagement, off Ecnomus, the Carthaginians had 350 sail.
Thirty Carthaginian and twenty-four Roman vessels were sunk, and
sixty-four of the former captured. The Punic fleet withdrew to the
coast of Africa, and prepared in the Bay of Carthage for another
battle. But the Romans sailed to the eastern side of the peninsula
which helps to form the bay, and there landed without opposition.

MARCUS ATILIUS REGULUS was put in command of the Roman forces in
Africa. For a time he was very successful, and the Carthaginians
became disheartened. Many of the towns near Cartilage surrendered, and
the capital itself was in danger. Peace was asked, but the terms
offered were too humiliating to be accepted.

Regulus, who began to despise his opponents, remained inactive at
Tunis, near Carthage, neglecting even to secure a line of retreat to
his fortified camp at Clupea. The next spring (255) he was surprised,
his army cut to pieces, and he himself taken prisoner. He subsequently
died a captive at Carthage.

The Romans, learning of this defeat, sent a fleet of 350 sail to
relieve their comrades who were shut up in Clupea. While on its way,
it gained a victory over the Carthaginian fleet off the Herméan
promontory, sinking 114 of the enemy's ships.

It arrived at Clupea in time to save its friends. The war in Africa
was now abandoned. The fleet, setting sail for home, was partly
destroyed in a storm, only eighty ships reaching port.

Hostilities continued for six years without any great results.
Panormus was taken in 254; the coast of Africa ravaged in 253;
Thermae and the island of Lipara were taken in 252, and Eryx in 249.

DREPANA and LILYBAEUM were now the only places in Sicily, held by
Carthage. A regular siege of Lilybaeum was decided upon, and the city
was blockaded by land and sea; but the besieging party suffered as
much as the besieged, its supplies were frequently cut off by the
cavalry of the Carthaginians, and its ranks began to be thinned by
disease.

The Consul, Publius Claudius, who had charge of the siege, determined
to surprise the Carthaginian fleet, which was stationed at Drepana
(249). He was unsuccessful, and lost three fourths of his vessels.
Another fleet of 120 sail sent to aid him was wrecked in a violent
storm.

The Romans were now in perplexity. The war had lasted fifteen years.
Four fleets had been lost, and one sixth of the fighting population.
They had failed in Africa, and the two strongest places in Sicily were
still in the enemy's hands. For six years more the war dragged on
(249-243).

A new Carthaginian commander, HAMILCAR BARCA (Lightning), meanwhile
took the field in Sicily. He was a man of great activity and military
talent, and the Romans at first were no match for him. He seemed in a
fair way to regain all Sicily. The apathy of the Senate was so great,
that at last some private citizens built and manned at their own
expense a fleet of 200 sail.

GAIUS LUTATIUS CATALUS, the Consul in command, surprised the enemy and
occupied the harbors of Drepana and Lilybaeum in 242. A Carthaginian
fleet which came to the rescue was met and destroyed off the AEGÁTES
INSULAE in 241. Hamilcar was left in Sicily without support and
supplies. He saw that peace must be made.

Sicily was surrendered. Carthage agreed to pay the cost of the war,--
about $3,000,000,--one third down, and the remainder in ten annual
payments. Thus ended the First Punic War.




CHAPTER XIII.

ROME AND CARTHAGE BETWEEN THE FIRST AND SECOND PUNIC WARS (241-218).


Twenty-three years elapsed between the First and Second Punic Wars.
The Carthaginians were engaged during the first part of this time in
crushing a mutiny of their mercenary troops.

Rome, taking advantage of the position in which her rival was placed,
seized upon SARDINIA and CORSICA, and, when Carthage objected,
threatened to renew the war, and obliged her to pay more than one
million dollars as a fine (237).

The acquisition of Sicily, Sardinia, and Corsica introduced into the
government of Rome a new system; viz. the PROVINCIAL SYSTEM.

Heretofore the two chief magistrates of Rome, the Consuls, had
exercised their functions over all the Roman possessions. Now Sicily
was made what the Romans called a _provincia_, or PROVINCE.
Sardinia and Corsica formed another province (235).

Over each province was placed a Roman governor, called Proconsul. For
this purpose two new Praetors were now elected, making four in all.
The power of the governor was absolute; he was commander in chief,
chief magistrate, and supreme judge.

The finances of the provinces were intrusted to one or more QUAESTORS.
All the inhabitants paid as taxes into the Roman treasury one tenth of
their produce, and five per cent of the value of their imports and
exports. They were not obliged to furnish troops, as were the
dependants of Rome in Italy.

The provincial government was a fruitful source of corruption. As the
morals of the Romans degenerated, the provinces were plundered without
mercy to enrich the coffers of the avaricious governors.

The Adriatic Sea at this time was overrun by Illyrican pirates, who
did much damage. Satisfaction was demanded by Rome of Illyricum, but
to no purpose. As a last resort, war was declared, and the sea was
cleared of the pirates in 229.

"The results of this Illyrican war did not end here, for it was the
means of establishing, for the first time, direct political relations
between Rome and the states of Greece, to many of which the
suppression of piracy was of as much importance as to Rome herself.
Alliances were concluded with CORCÝRA, EPIDAMNUS, and APOLLONIA; and
embassies explaining the reasons which had brought Roman troops into
Greece were sent to the Aetolians and Achaeans, to Athens and Corinth.
The admission of the Romans to the Isthmian Games in 228 formally
acknowledged them as the allies of the Greek states."

The Romans now began to look with hungry eyes upon GALLIA CISALPÍNA.
The appetite for conquest was well whetted. There had been peace with
the Gauls since the battle of Lake Vadimónis in 283. The _ager
publicus_, taken from the Gauls then, was still mostly unoccupied.
In 232 the Tribune Gaius Flaminius [Footnote: Gaius Flaminius, by his
agrarian laws gained the bitter hatred of the nobility. He was the first
Governor of Sicily, and there showed himself to be a man of integrity and
honesty, a great contrast to many who succeeded him.] carried an agrarian
law, to the effect that this land be given to the veterans and the poorer
classes. The law was executed, and colonies planted. To the Gauls this
seemed but the first step to the occupation of the whole of their
country. They all rose in arms except the Cenománi.

This contest continued for ten years, and in 225 Etruria was invaded
by an army of 70,000 men. The plans of the invaders, however,
miscarried, and they were hemmed in between two Roman armies near
TELAMON in 222, and annihilated. The Gallic king was slain at the
hands of the Consul MARCUS CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS. PAGE 61 Rome was now
mistress of the whole peninsula of Italy, excepting some tribes in
Liguria, who resisted a short time longer.

Three _military_ (Latin) colonies were founded to hold the Gauls
in check; PLACENTIA and CREMÓNA in the territory of the Insubres, and
MUTINA in that of the Boii. The _Via Flaminia_, the great
northern road, was extended from SPOLETIUM to ARIMINUM. [Footnote:
During this period the _Comitia Centuriáta_ was reorganized on the
basis of tribes (35) instead of money.]

Meanwhile Carthage was not idle. After subduing the revolt of the
mercenaries in 237, she formed the project of obtaining SPAIN as
compensation for the loss of Sicily, Sardinia, and Corsica. Hamilcar
Barca, by energetic measures, established (236-228) a firm foothold in
Southern and Southeastern Spain.

At his death, his son-in-law, Hasdrubal, continued his work. Many
towns were founded, trade prospered, and agriculture flourished. The
discovery of rich silver mines near Carthago Nova was a means of
enriching the treasury. After the assassination of Hasdrubal, in 220,
the ablest leader was Hannibal, son of Hamilcar. Although a young man
of but twenty-eight, he had had a life of varied experience. As a boy
he had shown great courage and ability in camp under his father. He
was a fine athlete, well educated in the duties of a soldier, and
could endure long privation of sleep and food. For the last few years
he had been in command of the cavalry, and had distinguished himself
for personal bravery, as well as by his talents as a leader.

Hannibal resolved to begin the inevitable struggle with Rome at once.
He therefore laid siege to Saguntum, a Spanish town allied to Rome. In
eight months the place was compelled to capitulate (219).

When Rome demanded satisfaction of Carthage for this insult, and
declared herself ready for war, the Carthaginians accepted the
challenge, and the Second Punic War began in 218.




CHAPTER XIV.

THE SECOND PUNIC WAR.--FROM THE PASSAGE OF THE PYRENEES TO THE BATTLE
OF CANNAE. (218-216.)

In the spring of 218 Hannibal started from Carthágo Nova to invade
Italy. His army consisted of 90,000 infantry, 12,000 cavalry, and 37
elephants. His march to the Pyrenees occupied two months, owing to the
opposition of the Spanish allies of Rome. Hannibal now sent back a
part of his troops, retaining 50,000 infantry and 9,000 cavalry, all
veterans. With these he crossed the mountains, and marched along the
coast by Narbo (Narbonne) and Nemansus (Nîmes), through the Celtic
territory, with little opposition. The last of July found him on the
banks of the Rhone, opposite Avenio (Avignon). The Romans were
astonished at the rapidity of his movements.

The Consuls of the year were SCIPIO and SEMPRONIUS. The former had
been in Northern Italy, leisurely collecting forces to attack Hannibal
in Spain; the latter was in Sicily, making preparations to invade
Africa. Scipio set sail for Spain, touching at Massilia near the end
of June. Learning there for the first time that Hannibal had already
left Spain, he hoped to intercept him on the Rhone. The Celtic tribes
of the neighborhood were won over to his side. Troops collected from
these were stationed along the river, but Scipio's main army remained
at Massilia. It was Hannibal's policy to cross the river before Scipio
arrived with his troops. He obtained all the boats possible, and
constructed numerous rafts to transport his main body of troops. A
detachment of soldiers was sent up the river with orders to cross at
the first available place, and, returning on the opposite bank, to
surprise the Celtic forces in the rear. The plan succeeded. The Celts
fled in confusion, and the road to the Alps was opened. Thus Scipio
was outgeneralled in the very beginning.

His course now should have been to return to Northern Italy with all
his forces, and take every means to check Hannibal there. Instead, he
sent most of his troops to Spain under his brother Gnaeus Scipio, and
himself, with but a few men, set sail for Pisae.

Meanwhile Hannibal hurried up the valley of the Rhone, across the
Isara, through the fertile country of the Allobroges, arriving, in
sixteen days from Avenio, at the pass of the first Alpine range (Mont
du Chat). Crossing this with some difficulty, owing to the nature of
the country and the resistance of the Celts, he hastened on through
the country of the Centrónes, along the north bank of the Isara. As he
was leaving this river and approaching the pass of the Little St.
Bernard, he was again attacked by the Celts, and obliged to make the
ascent amidst continual and bloody encounters. After toiling a day and
a night, however, the army reached the summit of the pass. Here, on a
table-land, his troops were allowed a brief rest.

The hardships of the descent were fully as great, and the fertile
valley of the Po was a welcome sight to the half-famished and
exhausted soldiers. Here they encamped, in September, and recruited
their wearied energies.

This famous march of Hannibal from the Rhone lasted thirty-three days,
and cost him 20,000 infantry and 3,000 cavalry.

The Romans were still unprepared to meet Hannibal. One army was in
Spain under Gnaeus Scipio; the other in Sicily, on its way to Africa,
under the Consul Sempronius. The only troops immediately available
were a few soldiers that had been left in the valley of the Po to
restrain the Gauls, who had recently shown signs of defection.

Publius Cornelius Scipio, upon his return from Massilia, took command
of these. He met Hannibal first in October, 218, near the river
Ticinus, a tributary of the Po. A cavalry skirmish followed, in which
he was wounded and rescued by his son, a lad of seventeen, afterwards
the famous Africanus. The Romans were discomfited, with considerable
loss.

They then retreated, crossing the Po at Placentia, and destroying the
bridge behind them. Hannibal forded the river farther up, and marched
along its right bank until he reached its confluence with the Trebia,
opposite Placentia. Here he encamped.

Meanwhile Sempronius, who had been recalled from Sicily, relieved the
disabled Scipio.

Early one raw morning in December, 218, the vanguard of the
Carthaginians was ordered to cross the Trebia, and, as soon any
resistance was met, to retreat. The other troops of Hannibal were
drawn up ready to give the enemy a hot reception, if, as he expected,
they should pursue his retreating vanguard. Sempronius was caught in
the trap, and all his army, except one division of 10,000, was cut to
pieces. The survivors took refuge in Placentia and Cremona, where they
spent the winter. Sempronius himself escaped to Rome.

The result of TREBIA was the insurrection of all the Celtic tribes in
the valley of the Po, who increased Hannibal's army by 60,000 infantry
and 4,000 cavalry. While the Carthaginian was wintering near
Placentia, the Romans stationed troops to guard the two highways
leading north from Rome and ending at Arretium and Ariminum, The
Consuls for this year were GAIUS FLAMINIUS and GNAEUS SERVILIUS. The
former occupied Arretium, the latter Ariminum. Here they were joined
by the troops that had wintered at Placentia.

In the spring, Hannibal, instead of attempting to pursue his march by
either of the highways which were fortified, outflanked the Romans by
turning aside into Etruria. His route led through a marshy and
unhealthy country, and many soldiers perished. Hannibal himself lost
an eye from ophthalmia. When he had arrived at Faesulae a report of
his course first reached Flaminius, who at once broke camp and
endeavored to intercept his enemy. Hannibal, however, had the start,
and was now near LAKE TRASIMÉNUS.

Here was a pass with a high hill on one side and the lake on the
other. Hannibal, with the flower of his infantry, occupied the hill.
His light-armed troops and horsemen were drawn up in concealment on
either side.

The Roman column advanced (May, 217), without hesitation, to the
unoccupied pass, the thick morning mist completely concealing the
position of the enemy. As the Roman vanguard approached the hill,
Hannibal gave the signal for attack. The cavalry closed up the
entrance to the pass, and at the same time the mist rolled away,
revealing the Carthaginian arms on the right and left. It was not a
battle, but a mere rout. The main body of the Romans was cut to
pieces, with scarcely any resistance, and the Consul himself was
killed. Fifteen thousand Romans fell, and as many more were captured.
The loss of the Carthaginians was but 1,500, and was confined mostly
to the Gallic allies. All Etruria was lost, and Hannibal could march
without hindrance upon Rome, whose citizens, expecting the enemy
daily, tore down the bridges over the Tiber and prepared for a siege.
QUINTUS FABIUS MAXIMUS was appointed Dictator.

Hannibal, however, did not march upon Rome, but turned through Umbria,
devastating the country as he went. Crossing the Apennines, he halted
on the shores of the Adriatic, in Picénum. After giving his army a
rest, he proceeded along the coast into Southern Italy.

The Romans, seeing that the city was not in immediate danger, raised
another army, and placed the Dictator in command. Fabius was a man of
determination and firmness, well advanced in years. He determined to
avoid a pitched battle, but to dog the steps of the enemy, harassing
him and cutting off his supplies as far as possible.

Meanwhile Hannibal again crossed the mountains into the heart of Italy
to Beneventum, and from there to Capua, the largest Italian city
dependent upon Rome. The Dictator followed, condemning his soldiers to
the melancholy task of looking on in inaction, while the enemy's
cavalry plundered their faithful allies. Finally, Fabius obtained what
he considered a favorable opportunity for an attack. Hannibal,
disappointed in his expectations that Capua would be friendly to him,
and not being prepared to lay siege to the town, had withdrawn towards
the Adriatic. Fabius intercepted him near Casilinum, in Campania, on
the left bank of the Volturnus. The heights that commanded the right
bank of the river were occupied by his main army; and the road itself,
which led across the river, was guarded by a strong division of men.

Hannibal, however, ordered his light-armed troops to ascend the
heights over the road during the night, driving before them oxen with
burning fagots tied to their horns, giving the appearance of an army
marching by torchlight. The plan was successful. The Romans abandoned
the road and marched for the heights, along which they supposed the
enemy were going. Hannibal, with a clear road before him, continued
his march with the bulk of his army. The next morning he recalled his
light-armed troops, which had been sent on to the hills with the oxen.
Their engagement with the Romans had resulted in a severe loss to
Fabius.

Hannibal then proceeded, without opposition, in a northeasterly
direction, by a very circuitous route. He arrived in Luceria, with
much booty and a full money-chest, at harvest time. Near here he
encamped in a plain rich in grain and grass for the support of his
army.

At Rome the policy of Fabius was severely criticised. His apparent
inaction was displeasing to a large party, and he was called Cunctator
(the Delayer). At length the assembly voted that his command be shared
by one of his lieutenants, Marcus Minucius. The army was divided into
two corps; one under Marcus, who intended to attack Hannibal at the
first opportunity; the other under Fabius, who still adhered to his
former tactics. Marcus made an attack, but paid dearly for his
rashness, and his whole corps would have been annihilated had not
Fabius come to his assistance and covered his retreat. Hannibal passed
the winter of 217-216 unmolested.

The season was spent by the Romans in active preparations for the
spring campaign. An army of 80,000 infantry and 6,000 cavalry was
raised and put under the command of the Consuls, LUCIUS ÆMILIUS
PAULLUS and GAIUS TERENTIUS VARRO. It was decided to test Hannibal's
strength once more in open battle. His army was only half as strong as
the Roman in infantry, but was much superior in cavalry.

In the early summer of 216 the Consuls concentrated their forces at
CANNAE, a hamlet near the mouth of the Aufidus. Early one morning in
June the Romans massed their troops on the left bank of the river,
with their cavalry on either wing, the right under Paullus, and the
left under Varro. The Proconsul Servilius commanded the centre.

The Carthaginians were drawn up in the form of a crescent, flanked by
cavalry. Both armies advanced to the attack at the same time. The
onset was terrible; but though the Romans fought with a courage
increased by the thought that their homes, wives, and children were at
stake, they were overwhelmed on all sides. Seventy thousand fell on
the field, among whom were Paullus, Servilius, many officers, and
eighty men of senatorial rank. This was the most crushing defeat ever
experienced by the Romans. All Southern Italy, except the Latin
colonies and the Greek cities on the coast, went over to Hannibal.




CHAPTER XV.

THE SECOND PUNIC WAR.-FROM CANNAE TO THE BATTLE OF ZAMA (216-202).


ROME was appalled; but though defeated, she was not subdued. All the
Latin allies were summoned for aid in the common peril. Boys and old
men alike took up arms even the slaves were promised freedom if they
would join the ranks.

Hannibal marched from Cannae into Campania. He induced Capua, the
second city of Italy, to side with him. But his expectations that
other cities would follow her example were not fulfilled. He went into
winter quarters here (215-214). The Capuans, notorious for their
luxurious and effeminate habits, are said to have injured his
soldiers. But Hannibal's superiority as a general is unquestionable,
and his want of success after this was due to insufficient aid from
home, and to the fact that the resources of Rome were greater than
those of Carthage. The Latin allies of Rome had remained true to their
allegiance, and only one city of importance was under his control. It
was an easy matter to conquer the enemy in open battle, but to support
his own army was more difficult, for all Italy had been devastated. On
the other hand, the Romans were well supplied with food from their
possessions in Sicily.

Hannibal saw, therefore, that more active measures than those already
employed were necessary. He sent to Carthage an appeal for aid. He
formed an alliance with Philip V. of Macedonia, and earnestly urged
Hasdrubal Baroa, his lieutenant in Spain, to come to his assistance.
He hoped, with this army from the north, with supplies and
reinforcements from Carthage, and with such troops as he might obtain
from Macedonia, to concentrate a large force at Rome and compel her
into submission.

The Romans, realizing the position of Hannibal, kept what forces they
could spare in Spain, under the two Scipio brothers, Publius and
Gnaeus. With these they hoped to stop reinforcements from reaching the
enemy from that quarter. At the same time their army in Northern
Greece effectually engaged the attention of Philip. Thus two years
(214-212) passed without any material change in the situation of
affairs in Italy.

In 212, while the Carthaginians were in the extreme south of Italy,
besieging Tarentum, the Romans made strenuous efforts to recover
Campania, and especially Capua. Hannibal, learning the danger, marched
rapidly north, and failing to break through the lines which enclosed
the city, resolved to advance on Rome itself.

Silently and quickly he marched along the _Via Latino_ through
the heart of the territory of Rome, to within three miles of the city,
and with his vanguard he even rode up to one of the city gates. But no
ally joined him; no Roman force was recalled to face him; no proposals
of peace reached his camp. Impressed by the unmoved confidence of the
enemy, he withdrew as quickly as he came, and retreated to his head-
quarters in the South.

Capua fell in 211, and the seat of war, to the great relief of Rome,
was removed to Lucania and Bruttium. The punishment inflicted upon
Capua was severe. Seventy of her Senators were killed, three hundred
of her chief citizens imprisoned, and the whole people sold as slaves.
The city and its territory were declared to be Roman territory, and
the place was afterwards repeopled by Roman occupants.

Such was the fate of this famous city. Founded in as early times as
Rome itself, it became the most flourishing city of Magna Graecia,
renowned for its luxury and refinement, and as the home of all the
highest arts and culture.


AFFAIRS IN SICILY.

HIERO II., tyrant of Syracuse, died in 216. During his long reign of
more than fifty years he had been the stanch friend and ally of Rome
in her struggles with Carthage. Hieronymus, the grandson and successor
of Hiero, thought fit to ally himself with Carthage. The young tyrant,
who was arrogant and cruel, was assassinated after reigning a few
months.

The Roman Governor of Sicily, MARCELLUS, troubled by the Carthaginian
faction in Syracuse, threatened the city with an attack unless the
leaders of this faction were expelled. In return, they endeavored to
arouse the citizens of the neighboring city of Leontini against Rome
and the Roman party in Syracuse. Marcellus at once attacked and
stormed Leontini. The Syracusans then closed their city gates against
him. A siege of two years (214-212) followed, famous for the various
devices adopted by the noted mathematician ARCHIMÉDES [Footnote:
Archimédes was a great investigator in the science of mathematics. He
discovered the ratio of a sphere to its circumscribed cylinder. One of
his famous sayings was, "Give me where to stand, and I will move the
world." He exerted his ingenuity in the invention of powerful machines
for the defence of Syracuse. Eight of his works on mathematics are in
existence. He was killed at the close of the siege by a Roman soldier,
who would have spared his life had he not been too intent on a
mathematical problem to comply with the summons to surrender. On his
tombstone, it is said, was engraved a cylinder enclosing a sphere.] to
defeat the movements of the Romans. The city was finally betrayed by a
Spanish officer, and given up to plunder. The art treasures in which
it was so rich were conveyed by Marcellus to Rome. From this time
(212) the city became a part of the province of Sicily and the head-
quarters of the Roman Governor.


THE CAMPAIGNS IN SPAIN.

PUBLIUS CORNELIUS SCIPIO, with his brother, GNAEUS CORNELIUS SCIPIO
CALVUS, were winning victories over the Carthaginians under HANNO and
HASDRUBAL. The greatest of these was fought in 215 at Ibera, the
location of which is uncertain. Spain was gradually being gained over
to Rome, when the Carthaginians, making desperate efforts, sent large
reinforcements there (212). The armies of the Scipios were separated,
surprised, and overwhelmed. Both their leaders were slain, and Spain
was lost to Rome.

Unless checked, the Carthaginians would now cross the Alps, enter
Italy, and, joining forces with Hannibal, place Rome in great danger.
PUBLIUS CORNELIUS SCIPIO, son of one of the slain generals, then but
twenty-four years of age, offered to go to Spain and take command. He
had previously made himself very popular as Aedile, and was
unanimously elected to the command. On his arrival in Spain in 210, he
found the whole country west of the Ebro under the enemy's control.

Fortunately for the Romans, the three Carthaginian generals, HASDRUBAL
and MAGO, brothers of Hannibal, and HASDRUBAL, son of Gisco, did not
act in harmony. Thus Scipio was enabled, in the following spring
(209), to capture Carthago Nova, the head-quarters of the enemy. A
good harbor was gained, and eighteen ships of war, sixty-three
transports, $600,000, and 10,000 captives fell into the hands of the
Romans.

Shortly after, Scipio fought Hasdrubal, the brother of Hannibal, at
BAECULAE, in the upper valley of the Baetis (Guadalquivir); but the
battle was not decisive, for Hasdrubal was soon seen crossing the
Pyrenees, with a considerable force, on his way to Italy. He spent the
winter (209-208) in Gaul.

The two Carthaginian generals now in Spain, Mago, and Hasdrubal, the
son of Gisco, retired, the latter to Lusitania, the former to the
Baleares, to wait for reinforcements from home.

The next year another battle was fought near Baecula, resulting in the
total defeat of the Carthaginians, who retreated to Gadus, in the
southwestern part of Spain.

The country being now (206) under Roman influence, Scipio crossed the
straits to Africa, and visited the Numidian princes, SYPHAX and
MASINISSA, whom he hoped to stir up against Carthage. On his return,
after quelling a mutiny of the soldiers, who were dissatisfied about
their pay, he resigned his command, and started for Rome, where he
intended to become a candidate for the consulship.


OPERATIONS IN ITALY.

The news of the approach of Hasdrubal caused intense anxiety at Rome.
Every nerve was strained to prevent the union of the two brothers. The
Consuls for this year (207) were GAIUS CLAUDIUS NERO, a patrician, and
MARCUS LIVIUS, a plebeian. To the former was intrusted the task of
keeping Hannibal in check in Bruttium, while the duty of intercepting
Hasdrubal was given to the latter.

The Carthaginian had already reached the neighborhood of the river
Metaurus, a small stream south of the Rubicon. From here he sent
messengers to inform his brother of his approach and proposed line of
march. These messengers were captured by Nero, and the contents of
their despatches learned. He at once pushed north with his forces,
joined Livius, met Hasdrubal on the METAURUS early in 207, and
defeated his army with great slaughter. Among the slain was Hasdrubal
himself. Nero returned south without delay, and the first intimation
that Hannibal had of this battle was the sight of his brother's head
thrown into the camp by the victorious foe.

The war in Italy was now virtually ended, for, although during four
years more Hannibal stood at bay in a corner of Bruttium, he was
powerless to prevent the restoration of Roman authority throughout
Italy. Nothing now remained to Carthage outside of Africa, except the
ground on which Hannibal was making his last stand.


INVASION OF AFRICA.

Scipio, on his return from Spain, urged an immediate invasion of
Africa. He was elected Consul in 205, receiving Sicily as his
province, with permission to cross into Africa if it seemed to him
wise. He was so popular that voluntary contributions of men, money,
and supplies poured in from all sides. The old-fashioned aristocracy,
however, did not like him, as his taste for splendid living and Greek
culture was particularly offensive to them; and a party in the Senate
would have recalled him, had not the popular enthusiasm in his favor
been too strong to be resisted.

In 204 he sailed from Lilybaeum, and landed near Utica. He was
welcomed by Masinissa, whose friendship he had gained in his previous
visit to Africa from Spain. Syphax, however, sided with Carthage; but
in 203 Scipio twice defeated him and the Carthaginian forces.

Negotiations for peace followed, but the war party in Carthage
prevailed. Hannibal was recalled. He returned to fight his last battle
with Rome, October 19, 202, at ZAMA, a short distance west of
Carthage. The issue was decided by the valor of the Roman legions, who
loved their commander and trusted his skill. Hannibal met his first
and only defeat, and Scipio won his title of AFRICÁNUS. The battle was
a hard one. After all the newly enrolled troops of Hannibal had been
killed or put to flight, his veterans, who had remained by him in
Italy, although surrounded on all sides by forces far outnumbering
their own, fought on, and were killed one by one around their beloved
chief. The army was fairly annihilated. Hannibal, with only a handful,
managed to escape to Hadrumétum.

The battle of Zama decided the fate of the West. The power of Carthage
was broken, and her supremacy passed to Rome. She was allowed to
retain her own territory intact, but all her war-ships, except ten,
were given up, and her prisoners restored; an annual tax of about
$200,000, for fifty years, was to be paid into the Roman treasury, and
she could carry on no war without the consent of Rome. Masinissa was
rewarded by an increase in territory, and was enrolled among the
"allies and friends of the Roman people."

Rome was now safe from any attack. She had become a great
Mediterranean power. Spain was divided into two provinces, and the
north of Africa was under her protection.

Such was the result of the seventeen years' struggle. Scipio was
welcomed home, and surnamed AFRICANUS. He enjoyed a triumph never
before equalled. His statue was placed, in triumphal robes and crowned
with laurels, in the Capitol. Many honors were thrust upon him, which
he had the sense to refuse. He lived quietly for some years, taking no
part in politics.




CHAPTER XVI.

ROME IN THE EAST.


ROME was now in a position to add new nations to her list of subjects.
The kingdoms of the East which formerly composed a part of the vast
empire of Alexander the Great, and which finally went to swell the
limits of Roman authority, were Egypt, Syria, Macedonia, and Greece
proper.

EGYPT was governed by the Ptolemies, and included at this time the
valley of the Nile, Palestine, Phoenicia, the island of Cyprus, and a
number of towns in Thrace.

SYRIA, extending from the Mediterranean to the Indus, was composed of
various nations which enjoyed a semi-independence. Under incompetent
rulers, she saw portion after portion of her dominions fall from her.
Thus arose Pergamus, Pontus, Cappadocia, and Phrygia.

MACEDONIA was ruled by Philip V., and included also a large portion of
Northern Greece.

GREECE proper was divided between the ACHAEAN and AETOLIAN LEAGUES,
the former including the most of the Peloponnesus, the latter the
greater part of Central Greece.

Ever since the repulse of Pyrrhus, Rome had been slowly drifting into
closer contact with the East. She formed an alliance with Egypt in
273. From this country had come in part her supply of corn during the
Second Punic War. In 205, Ptolemy V. became king, and, through fear of
the Macedonian and Syrian kings, sought the protection of Rome.

The punishment of the Illyrican pirates in 228 brought Rome into
closer relations with Greece. These connections had been sufficient to
open the Eastern ports to her trade, but her struggle with Carthage
had left her no time or strength to interfere actively in Eastern
politics, until she was forced to take action by the alliance of
Philip V. of Macedonia and Hannibal, and by the former's threatened
invasion of Italy in 214. A small force was sent into Greece, which
was soon largely increased by the dissatisfied subjects of Philip.

The only object of Rome in the First Macedonian War (214-205) was to
prevent Philip from lending aid to Hannibal; and in this she was
partially successful. None of the Macedonian troops entered Italy, but
four thousand of them were at Zama.

The military operations of this war were of slight importance. Marcus
Valerius Laevinus was sent to the Adriatic, and pushed the king so
hard that he was obliged to burn the fleet in which he intended to
sail for Italy. Philip was at this time at war with Aetolia. Laevinus
assisted the Aetolians, and the king was too fully occupied at home to
think of operations farther away. But in 205, the Romans, wishing to
concentrate their energies upon the invasion of Africa, made peace.

Some of Philip's soldiers had been captured at Zama. He demanded their
return. The answer was, that, if he wished war again, he could have
it.

There were several other reasons which led to the SECOND MACEDONIAN
WAR (200-197). Philip had agreed with ANTIOCHUS III., king of Syria,
to attempt with him the division of Egypt, since it seemed probable
that the young king, Epiphanes (Ptolemy V.), who was only four years
old, would not be able to make an effectual resistance. The ministers
of Egypt sought the protection of Rome. On their journey, the Roman
envoys sent to assume the office of protectorship remonstrated with
Philip.

In Asia Minor Philip had conducted himself with such barbarity that
the people rose against him; and from a similar cause Greece was
driven to seek alliances which would protect her against him.

Rome was unwilling to undertake a new war, but the people were induced
to vote for one, on the representation that the only means of
preventing an invasion of Italy was to carry the war abroad.

This year (200) the Consul, Publius Sulpicius Galba, was sent with a
considerable force across the Adriatic. His campaign, and that of the
Consul Villius during the next year, were productive of no decisive
results, but in 198 the Consul TITUS QUINCTIUS FLAMINÍNUS, a man of
different calibre, conducted the war with vigor. He defeated Philip on
the Aóus, drove him back to the pass of Tempe, and the next year
utterly defeated him at CYNOSCEPHALAE.

The king had drawn up his forces in two divisions. With the first he
broke through the line of the legions, which, however, closed in
around him with but little loss. The other division was attacked by
the Romans, while it was forming, and thoroughly discomfited. The
victory of the Romans was decisive.

About the same time the Achaeans captured CORINTH from Philip, and the
Rhodians defeated his troops in Caria.

Further resistance was impossible. Philip was left in possession of
Macedonia alone; he was deprived of all his dependencies in Greece,
Thrace, and Asia Minor, and was forbidden, as Carthage had been, to
wage war without Rome's consent.

The next year (196), at the Isthmian Games, the "freedom of Greece"
was proclaimed to the enthusiastic crowds, and two years later
Flamininus withdrew his troops from the so called "three fetters of
Greece,"--Chalcis, Demetrias, and Corinth,--and, urging the Greeks to
show themselves worthy of the gift of the Roman people, he returned
home to enjoy a well earned triumph.

The chief result of the second Macedonian war was, therefore, the firm
establishment of a ROMAN PROTECTORATE OVER GREECE AND EGYPT. The wedge
had been entered and the interference of Rome in Eastern affairs was
assured.




CHAPTER XVII.

THE SYRIAN WAR.


Antiochus III. of Syria, who had proposed to share Egypt with Philip,
had been engaged for some time in a campaign in the East, and did not
hear of his ally's danger until too late to aid him. However, he
claimed for himself portions of Asia Minor and Thrace, which Philip
had previously held, and which Rome now declared free and independent.
He crossed the Hellespont into Thrace in 196, but did not dare to
enter Greece, although earnestly urged to do so by the Aetolians,
until after Flamininus had withdrawn all his troops (192).

Antiochus was no general. Himself irresolute and fond of pleasure, the
power behind his throne was HANNIBAL. This great soldier, after his
defeat at Zama, did not relinquish the aim of his life. He became the
chief magistrate of his native city, and in a short time cleared the
moral atmosphere, which was charged with corruption and depravity.
Under him Carthage might have risen again. But his intrigues with
Antiochus, with whom he wished to make an alliance, gave Rome an
opportunity to interfere. His surrender was demanded. He fled, and,
after wandering from coast to coast, became the trusted adviser of the
Syrian king.

Had Antiochus been energetic after his arrival in Greece, he could
have accomplished something before the Roman troops came. But he
disregarded the warnings of Hannibal, and spent valuable time in minor
matters. The Romans arrived in 191, and under Glabrio at Thermopylae
drove back the intruder, who hastily retired to Asia Minor. The
Aetolians were punished for their infidelity.

In 190, LUCIUS CORNELIUS SCIPIO was elected Consul, and put in command
of the army in the East, with the understanding that he should be
accompanied by his brother Africanus, and have the benefit of his
military skill and experience. Under his command, the Romans crossed
the Hellespont and sought Antiochus in his own kingdom.

Hannibal could do nothing with the poorly disciplined troops of the
king. They were met by the invading forces at MAGNESIA, in Lydia, in
190, and 80,000 Asiatics were put to rout by 30,000 Romans, 50,000
being slain. The loss of the victors was slight.

On that day the fate of Asia was sealed. Antiochus relinquished all
pretensions to any territory west of the river Halys and the Taurus
mountains. His chariots, elephants, fleet, and treasures were all
surrendered.

Scipio returned home to enjoy a triumph, and added ASIATICUS to his
name, as his brother had taken that of Africanus in commemoration of
his victory.

Gneius Manlius Vulso succeeded Scipio in the East. He made a campaign
against the Gauls, who had settled in Galatia about a century before,
and had become wealthy by means of constant plunderings. The excuse
for the campaign was, that they had served in the Syrian army; the
reason was, their wealth, and the ambition of the Consul for glory.

The Galatians were easily overcome, their wealth seized, and they
themselves became assimilated to their neighbors. This war is
noticeable chiefly for the reason that Manlius undertook it _without
the authority of the Senate_, the first instance of its kind, and a
precedent which was too frequently followed in later times. On his
return to Rome he was allowed a triumph, which stamped his act as
legal.

These wars in the East brought to Rome immense riches, which laid the
foundation of its Oriental extravagance and luxury, and finally
undermined the strength of the state. From Greece were introduced
learning and refinement, from Asia immorality and effeminacy. The
vigor and tone of Roman society are nowhere more forcibly shown than
in the length of time it took for its subjugation by these ruinous
exotics.

Meanwhile, at Rome the political enemies of the Scipios were in the
ascendency. Asiaticus was accused of misappropriating funds obtained
during his campaign in the East. As he was about to produce his
account-books before the Senate, his brother, Africanus, seized them,
tore them to pieces, and threw the remnants on the floor. Asiaticus,
however, was sentenced to pay a fine. When it was afterwards intimated
that his brother too was implicated, he proudly reminded his enemies
that their insinuations were ill-timed, for it was the anniversary of
Zama. This remark changed the tide of feeling, and no more charges
were made.

Two years later (183), Africanus died in voluntary exile at Liternum,
on the coast of Campania. He had lived little more than fifty years.
His wife, Aemilia, was the daughter of Paullus, who fell at Cannae,
and the sister of him who afterwards conquered Perseus of Macedonia.
His daughter, CORNELIA, afterwards became the mother of the famous
GRACCHI.

Next to Caesar, Scipio was Rome's greatest general. During the
campaign in the East, he met Hannibal at the court of Antiochus. In
the conversation Hannibal is reported to have said that he considered
Alexander the greatest general, Pyrrhus next, and, had he himself
conquered Scipio, he would have placed himself before either.

Scipio lived to see Rome grow from an Italian power to be practically
the mistress of the world. He was of marked intellectual culture, and
as conversant with Greek as with his mother tongue. He possessed a
charm which made him popular at a time when the culture and arts of
Greece were not so courted at Rome as in later days.

Hannibal, after the defeat of Antiochus, was demanded by the Romans,
but, escaping, took refuge in Crete, and subsequently with Prusias,
King of Bithynia. His surrender was demanded, and troops were sent to
arrest him. Seeing no way of escape, he opened the bead on his ring
and swallowed the poison which it contained (183).

Thus died one of the greatest of commanders, without attaining the aim
of his life. He had lived but fifty-four years, yet his life was so
marked that people have ever since looked with wonder upon the
tremendous magnitude of what he undertook, and came so near
accomplishing.

This same year is also memorable for the death of "the last of the
Greeks," PHILOPOEMEN. [Footnote: See Ancient Greece, page 145.]




CHAPTER XVIII.

CONQUEST OF MACEDONIA AND GREECE. (I71-146.)


Although Philip had aided the Romans in their campaign against
Antiochus, he did not receive from them the expected reward in
additions to his territory. Immediate resistance would be futile; but
he labored patiently and quietly to increase his resources, and to
stir up among the neighboring Greeks hostile feeling towards Rome. He
placed his army on the best footing possible, and soon began to
enlarge his boundaries. Complaints were made to Rome, and the king was
compelled to give up his conquests, and confine himself to the limits
of Macedonia. In 179 Philip died, and was succeeded by his son
PERSEUS.

The new king was as able as his father, and more impatient of
subjection. He made friends with the surrounding princes, formed a
marriage connection with Antiochus IV. of Syria, and strove to arouse
among the Greeks memories of their former greatness.

The Senate, hearing of his numerous intrigues, determined to check
him. War was declared in 171; but the forces sent by Rome were at
first led by incompetent men, and nothing was accomplished until
LICIUS AEMILIUS PAULLUS was made Consul, and took charge of the war in
168.

Paullus (229-160) was the son of the Consul of the same name who was
killed at Cannae. His integrity was first shown when, as CURULE
AEDILE, [Footnote: See page 225] in 192, he prosecuted persons who had
made an illegal use of the public pastures. He was sent to Ulterior
Spain in 191 as governor, where, after some reverses, he put down all
insurrections. He was Consul in 182, and did good work in conquering a
tribe of marauders in Liguria. For this he was allowed a triumph.

He was elected Consul a second time in 168, and sent against Perseus.
The war was brought to a speedy end by the battle of PYDNA, on the
Thermáic Gulf, June 22. The king fled to Samothráce with his treasures
and family. He was shortly afterwards captured, but was treated with
kindness by the Consul.

Paullus now travelled through Greece. Later, assisted by
commissioners, he arranged the affairs of Macedonia. The country was
divided into four small republics, independent of each other, but
prohibited from intermarriage and commerce with one another.

On his return to Rome in 167, he enjoyed a triumph, which was graced
by Perseus and his three children. He was Censor in 164, and died four
years later.

Paullus had two sons by his first wife. The elder of these was adopted
by Fabius Maximus Cunctátor, the younger by the son of Africánus the
elder, his brother-in-law. He was of the "blue" blood of Rome, of
perfect honesty, and very popular, a good general, but somewhat
superstitious. A patron of learning and the fine arts, he gave his
sons the best training under Greek masters. A strong proof of his
popularity is the fact that his body was carried to its last resting
place by volunteers from the various peoples he had conquered.

Perseus spent his last days in confinement near Rome, enduring, it is
alleged, base and cruel treatment. He was the last king of Macedonia.

After the victory at Pydna, the sympathy shown in Greece for the
conquered monarch made the Romans more watchful of her interests
there. All suspected to be enemies were removed as hostages to Italy,
and among these was the historian POLYBIUS. He lived in Rome for more
than twenty years, and became a great friend of the younger Africánus,
whom he accompanied to the siege of Carthage.

Like Macedonia, Greece was separated into parts, independent of each
other, with no rights of _connubium_ or _commercium_. Utter
demoralization soon ensued, which proved a sure preventive to all
alliances liable to shake the authority of Rome.

Trouble again arose in Macedonia twenty years after Pydna, culminating
in what is sometimes called the FOURTH MACEDONIAN WAR (149-146). Under
the leadership of ANDRISCUS, who claimed to be a son of Perseus, the
people rebelled against the protection of Rome. They were twice
defeated in 148 by the praetor QUINTUS CAECILIUS METELLUS, who gained
the agnomen of MACEDONICUS. The country was made a Roman province,
with a Roman magistrate at its head.

At this time the Achaeans were quarrelling with Sparta. Metellus
warned them to desist, and when the Achaeans advanced against him, he
easily defeated them near SCARPHEIA.

Metellus was a moderate reformer and a model man. He belonged to an
illustrious plebeian _gens_, the Caecilian. Before his death in
115 three of his sons had been consuls, one censor, and the fourth was
a candidate for the consulship.

Metellus was succeeded in Greece by LUCIUS MUMMIUS, a cruel and harsh
leader. The remnant of the Achaean army had taken refuge in CORINTH.
The Senate directed Mummius to attack the city. Its capture in 146 was
marked by special cruelties. The city was burned to the ground;
beautiful pictures and costly statuary were ruthlessly destroyed. Gold
in abundance was carried to Rome. The last vestige of Greek liberty
vanished. The country became a Roman province under the name of
ACHAIA.

Corinth, the "eye of all Greece," remained in ruins for a century,
when it was rebuilt in 46 by Julius Caesar, who planted on its site a
colony of veterans and freedmen.




CHAPTER XIX.

THE THIRD PUNIC WAR, AND FALL OF CARTHAGE.


Fifty years had passed since Zama. It was a period of great commercial
prosperity for Carthage, but her government was weakened by the
quarrels of conflicting factions.

MASINISSA, King of Numidia, an ally of the Romans, was a continual
source of annoyance to Carthage. He made inroads upon her territory,
and, as she was bound by her treaty not to war upon any allies of
Rome, her only recourse was to complain to the Senate. In 157 an
embassy was sent to inquire into the troubles. MARCUS PORCIUS CATO,
the chief of the embassy, was especially alarmed at the prosperity of
the city, and from that time never ceased to urge its destruction. The
embassy did not reach any decision, but allowed matters to go on as
they might. Finally, when some sympathizers with Masinissa were
banished from the city, he attacked and defeated the Carthaginians,
compelled their army to pass under the yoke, and afterwards
treacherously destroyed it (150). Carthage was compelled to give up
some of her territory, and pay $5,000,000 indemnity.

After this victory, matters came to a crisis. The city must be
disciplined for warring with an ally of Rome. Cato never failed to
close any speech he might make in the Senate with the same cruel
words, _Delenda est Carthago_, "Carthage must be destroyed." The
people of Carthage were called to account. Desponding and broken-
hearted, they sent ambassadors to Rome. The answer given them was
obscure. They were requested to make reparation to Rome, and at the
same time they were assured that nothing should be undertaken against
Carthage herself. But in 149 the Consuls crossed with a large army
into Sicily, where the troops were organized, and Carthaginian
ambassadors were expected.

When they appeared, the Consuls declared that the Senate did not wish
to encroach upon the freedom of the people, but only desired some
security; for this purpose it demanded that, within thirty days, three
hundred children of the noblest families should be delivered into
their hands as hostages. This demand was met. The Romans then coolly
crossed over to Africa, and informed the Carthaginians that they were
ready to treat with them on any question not previously settled.

When the ambassadors again appeared before the Consuls, they were told
that Carthage must deliver over all her arms and artillery; for, they
said, as Rome was able to protect her, there was no need of Carthage
possessing arms. Hard as was this command, it was obeyed. They were
then told that Carthage had indeed shown her good will, but that Rome
had no control over the city so long as it was fortified. The
preservation of peace, therefore, required that the people should quit
the city, give up their navy, and build a new town without walls at a
distance of ten miles from the sea. The indignation and fury which
this demand excited were intense. The gates were instantly closed, and
all the Romans and Italians who happened to be within the city were
massacred.

The Romans, who expected to find a defenceless population, imagined
that the storming of the place would be an easy matter. But despair
had suggested to the Carthaginians means of defence in every
direction. All assaults were repelled. Everybody was engaged day and
night in the manufacture of arms. Nothing can be more heartrending
than this last struggle of despair. Every man and every woman labored
to the uttermost for the defence of the city with a furious
enthusiasm.

Two years after the siege began, PUBLIUS CORNELIUS SCIPIO AFRICÁNUS,
the Younger, was elected Consul while but thirty-seven (under the
legal age), for the express purpose of giving him charge of the siege.
After two years of desperate fighting and splendid heroism on the part
of the defenders, the famished garrison could hold out no longer.

Carthage fell in 146, and the ruins of the city burned for seventeen
days. The destruction was complete. A part of her territory was given
to Numidia. The rest was made a Roman province, and called AFRICA.

The year 149 saw the death of two men who had been Carthage's most
bitter enemies, but who were not allowed to see her downfall,--
MASINISSA and CATO, the one aged ninety, the other eighty-five.

Masinissa's (239-149) hostility dates from the time he failed to get
the promised hand of Hasdrubal's daughter, Sophonisba, who was given
to his rival, Syphax. After the battle of Zama, most of the
possessions of Syphax fell to Masinissa, and among them this same
Sophonisba, whom he married. Scipio, however, fearing her influence
over him, demanded her as a Roman captive, whereupon she took poison.
Masinissa was a courageous prince, but a convenient tool for the
Romans.

CATO THE ELDER (_Major_), (234-149,) whose long public career was
a constant struggle with the enemies of the state abroad, and with the
fashions of his countrymen at home, was a type of the _old_ Roman
character, with a stern sense of duty that forbade his neglecting the
interests of state, farm, or household. In 184, in his capacity as
Censor, he acted with extreme rigor. He zealously asserted old-
fashioned principles, and opposed the growing tendency to luxury. All
innovations were in his eyes little less than crimes. He was the
author of several works, one of which, a treatise on agriculture, has
been preserved.

Cicero's "Cato Major" represents him in his eighty-fourth year
discoursing about old age with Africánus the younger, and Laelius, a
friend of the latter.




CHAPTER XX.

ROME AND SPAIN.-THE NUMANTINE AND SERVILE WARS. (206-132.)


Africanus the elder left Spain in 206. After a provincial government
of nine years (206-197), the country was divided into two provinces,
separated by the IBÉRUS (Ebro), and each province was assigned to a
praetor. It was some time, however, before Spain was really brought
into a state of complete peace and order. The mountains and forests
were a formidable obstacle to the Roman legions, and favored guerilla
warfare, which makes conquest slow and laborious.

The most warlike of the Spanish tribes was the CELTIBÉRI, who occupied
the interior of the peninsula. They were always uncertain and
intractable, continually breaking out into revolt. In 195, Cato the
elder put down a rebellion led by them. He established more firmly the
Roman power east of the Ibérus. He disarmed the inhabitants of this
part of Spain, and compelled all from the Pyrenees to the Guadalquivir
to pull down their fortifications.

Still the smouldering fires of rebellion were not extinguished, for,
sixteen years later (179), we find TIBERIUS SEMPRONIUS GRACCHUS, the
father of the famous Gracchi, as Governor of Spain, fighting the
troublesome Celtibéri. He captured over one hundred of their towns,
but tempered his victories with moderate measures, showing himself
greater in peace than in war. He granted to the poorer classes lands
on favorable conditions, and did much to produce contentment among the
natives. But farther west, in the valleys of the Douro and Tagus, and
in Lusitania (Portugal), there seems to have been constant warfare.

In 154, MUMMIUS, the same who eight years later sacked Corinth, was
Governor of Farther Spain. His defeat by the Lusitanians encouraged
the Celtibéri to revolt again, and there followed another defeat, with
a massacre of many Roman citizens. Two years later (152), CLAUDIUS
MARCELLUS avenged these losses, founded Corduba, and governed the
country humanely. His successors, LUCIUS LUCULLUS and SERVIUS GALBA,
were so cruel and grasping as to drive the Lusitanians into another
open rebellion, headed by VIRIÁTHUS, a bold and daring bandit. During
seven years (147-140) he defeated again and again the armies sent
against him. The Celtibéri joined his standards, and Spain seemed
likely to slip from the Romans. The only check to these successes was
during the command of METELLUS MACEDONICUS (143); when he was
recalled, matters returned to their former condition.

In 140, the Consul Mancínus was obliged to capitulate, and, to save
himself and his army, made a treaty which the Senate refused to
sanction.

Viriáthus was finally (139) assassinated by persons hired by the
Consul Caepio; his people were then subdued, and the government was
ably conducted (138) by DECIMUS JUNIUS BRUTUS.


THE NUMANTINE WAR (143-133).

The Celtibéri, however, were still in arms. The strong city of
NUMANTIA, the capital of one of their tribes, witnessed more than one
defeat of a Roman Consul before its walls (141-140). Finally Rome sent
out her best general, Africanus the younger.

After devoting several months to the disciplining of his troops, he
began (134) a regular siege of the place. It was defended with the
utmost bravery and tenacity, until, forced by the last extreme of
famine, it surrendered (133). The inhabitants were sold as slaves, and
the town was levelled to the ground. The victor was honored with the
title of NUMANTÍNUS.

The fall of Numantia gave Rome a hold upon the interior of Spain,
which was never lost. The country now, with the exception of its
northern coast, was nominally Roman territory. Several towns were
established with Latin municipal rights _(municipia)_, and, on
the whole, order was maintained. Along the coast of the Mediterranean
there sprang up many thriving and populous towns, which became centres
of civilization to the neighboring districts, and were treated by Rome
rather as allies than as subjects. Some of them were allowed to coin
the silver money of Rome. The civilizing process, due to Roman
influence, went on rapidly in these parts, while the interior remained
in barbarism.

In 105 the peninsula was overrun by the Cimbri, a barbarous race from
the north. The country was ravaged, but finally saved by the brave
Celtibéri, who forced the invaders back into Gaul.

 THE SERVILE WAR (134-132).

While the Numantine war was still in progress, a war with the slaves
broke out in Sicily, where they had been treated with special
barbarity.

For a long time slave labor had been taking the place of that of
freemen. The supply was rendered enormous by constant wars, and by the
regular slave trade carried on with the shores of the Black Sea and
Greece. The owners of the slaves became an idle aristocracy.

The immediate cause of the outbreak in Sicily was the cruelty of a
wealthy slave-owner, Damophilus. The leader of the slaves was EUNUS,
who pretended to be a Syrian prophet. A number of defeats were
suffered by the Roman armies, until, finally, PUBLIUS RUTILIUS
captured the strongholds of the slaves, TAUROMENIUM and ENNA, and thus
closed the war. For his success he was allowed an ovation.




CHAPTER XXI.

INTERNAL HISTORY.--THE GRACCHI.


We have seen how the long struggle between the patricians and
plebeians terminated in a nominal victory for the latter. From about
275, the outward form of the old constitution had undergone little
change. It was nominally that of a "moderate democracy." The Senate
and offices of state were, in law, open to all alike. In practice,
however, the constitution became an oligarchy. The Senate, not the
Comitias, ruled Rome. Moreover, the Senate was controlled by a class
who claimed all the privileges of a nobility. The Comitias were rarely
called upon to decide a question. Most matters were settled by a
DECREE OF THE SENATE (_Senatus Consultum_). To be sure the
Comitia declared for war or peace, but the Senate conducted the war
and settled the conditions of peace. It also usually assigned the
commands, organized the provinces, and managed the finances.

The causes for this ascendency of the Senate are not hard to find. It
was a body made up of men capable of conducting affairs. It could be
convened at any time, whereas the voters of the Comitias were
scattered over all Italy, and, if assembled, would not be competent to
decide questions demanding knowledge of military matters and foreign
policy.

The Senate and the Roman nobility were in the main the same. All
patricians were nobles, but all nobles were not patricians. The
patricians were the descendants of the original founders of the city.
The nobles were the descendants of any one who had filled one of the
following six curule offices, viz. Dictator, Magister Equitum, Consul,
Interrex, Praetor, or Curule Aedile. These nobles possessed the right
to place in their hall, or carry in funeral processions, a wax mask of
this ancestor, and also of any other member of the family who had held
a curule office.

A plebeian who first held this office was called a _novus homo_,
or "new man."

The Senate, thus made up of patricians and nobles, had at this time
the monopoly of power. Legally, however, it had no positive authority.
The right of the people to govern was still valid, and there was only
wanting a magistrate with the courage to remind them of their legal
rights, and urge the exercise of them.

Such a magistrate was found in TIBERIUS SEMPRONIUS GRACCHUS. With him
was ushered in the contest which lasted for more than a century, and
brought to the surface some of the proudest names of Roman history. On
one side or the other we find them,--MARIUS and SULLA, CAESAR and
POMPEY, AUGUSTUS and ANTONY--arraying Rome against herself, until the
glories of the Republic were swallowed up in the misrule and dishonor
of the Empire.

Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus the elder (see Chapter XX.) belonged to
the nobility, but not to the aristocracy. He married CORNELIA, the
daughter of Africánus the elder. They had twelve children, of whom all
but three died young. Two sons and a daughter lived to maturity. The
daughter, SEMPRONIA, married Africánus the younger. The sons, TIBERIUS
and GAIUS, grew up under the care of their noble and gifted mother,
who was left a widow when they were mere boys.

Tiberius (164-133) entered the army, and served under his brother-in-
law during the third Punic war. Ten years later (136) he was Quaestor
in Spain, where he won the affections of the people by adhering to the
mild policy which his father had previously followed. His popular
measures here displeased his brother-in-law, and he ceased to be a
favorite with him. On his return home he passed through Tuscany where
he was astonished to see large tracts of the _ager publicus_ (see
Chapter VII.) cultivated by slave gangs, while the free poor citizens
of the Republic were wandering in towns without employment, and
deprived of the land which, according to law (see the Licinian
Rogations), should have been divided among them, and not held in large
quantities by the rich land-owners.

Tiberius determined to rectify this wrong. In 133 he offered himself
as candidate for the tribuneship, and was elected. He then began
boldly the battle for the commons. He proposed to revise the Agrarian
Law, now a dead letter, which forbade the holding of more than 320
acres of the _ager publicus_ by one individual. Occupants who had
fenced this land and improved it were to be compensated therefor.

The wealthy classes and the Senate at once took sides against
Tiberius, and the struggle began. One of the other Tribunes, OCTAVIUS
CAECÍNA, who was himself a large land-owner, taking advantage of his
authority as Tribune, interposed his veto to prevent a vote upon the
question.

Gracchus, full of enthusiasm over the justice of his cause, obtained,
contrary to all precedent, the removal of his colleague from office,
and passed his Agrarian Law. Three commissioners were appointed,
himself, his brother, and his father-in-law, APPIUS CLAUDIUS, to carry
it into effect.

It was contrary to the law that a person should hold the office of
Tribune for two successive years. But Gracchus, in his desire to carry
out his plans, determined to violate this rule, and offered himself as
candidate for the next year. The election day came, and when it became
evident that he would be re-elected, the aristocrats, who had turned
out in full force on the Campus Martius with their retinues of armed
slaves and clients, raised a riot, and, killing Gracchus with three
hundred of his followers, threw their bodies into the Tiber (133).
Thus was shed the first blood of the civil struggle. The mob was led
by SCIPIO NASÍCA, the uncle of Tiberius. Africánus, when he heard of
the murder of his brother-in-law, exclaimed, "Justly slain."

The agrarian law, however, which had passed, was too evidently just to
be openly ignored. The remaining two commissioners continued their
work, until, within two years, 40,000 families were settled on tracts
of the public land which the patricians were compelled to vacate. But
the commissioners became unpopular, for those who received lands were
not always satisfied, and those who were obliged to leave them were
enraged. The commissioners were suspended, and the law repealed.

The mantle of Tiberius fell on GAIUS GRACCHUS. For a time after his
brother's death he retired from politics, and served in the army in
Africa and Sardinia, where he was Quaestor. His valor, wisdom, and
justice made him justly popular, but caused him to be regarded with
suspicion at Rome. In 123 he was elected Tribune, and twice re-
elected. He revived his brother's agrarian law, and became at once the
avowed enemy of the Senate. As a means of increasing his popularity,
he endeavored to admit all the Italians to the privileges of Roman
citizenship, and to limit the price of bread.

Gains gained the favor of the _Equites_ (Knights), the commercial
class, by carrying through the assembly a law by which all judicial
functions were taken from the Senate and intrusted to the Knights.
Heretofore all civil and criminal cases of importance had been tried
before a jury chosen from the Senate. These juries were often venal
and corrupt, and it was a notorious fact that their verdicts could be
bought.

The transferring of the juries to the Equites made Gaius for a time
very powerful. He caused another law to be passed, to the effect that
no Roman citizen should be put to death without legal trial and an
appeal to the assembly of the people.

But the plan of Gaius to extend the franchise to all the Italians
ruined his popularity. The Roman citizens had no desire to share their
rights with the Etruscans and Samnites. Riots again broke out, as ten
years before. The aristocracy again armed itself. Gaius with 3,000 of
his friends was murdered in 121, and the Senate was once more master
of the situation.

However, the results obtained by the Gracchi still remained. Forty
thousand peasants had been settled on public land. The jury law was in
force. No Roman citizen could be put to death without trial, unless
the state was held to be in danger.

Nearly all Roman writers unite in attacking the reputation of the
Gracchi; but viewed in the light of to-day their characters were
noble, and their virtues too conspicuous to be obscured.

A few years previous to this, the younger Africánus died (129). His
remark about the death of Tiberius Gracchus gave dire offence to the
popular party, and a few days later he was found dead in his bed,
probably "a victim of political assassination."

Africánus was a man of refinement and culture, a warm friend of
scholars, a patron of the Greek historian POLYBIUS, and of the poets
LUCILIUS and TERENCE. He was opposed to the tendency of his age
towards luxury and extravagance. He was an orator, as well as a
general. The one blot on his career is the terrible destruction of
Carthage, which he possibly might have averted had he shown firm
opposition to it.

SCIPIO NASÍCA, who led the mob against Tiberius, was compelled, though
Pontifex Maximus, to leave the city, and died an exile in Asia.




CHAPTER XXII.

EXTERNAL HISTORY.--PERGAMUM.--JUGURTHINE WAR (118-104).


Pergamum was an ancient city of Mysia on the Caícus, fifteen miles
from the sea. It first became important after the death of Alexander.
Its first king, Attalus I. (241-197), added a large territory to the
city. He was an ally of the Romans, and his successors remained their
firm friends. The city became one of the most prosperous and famous in
Asia Minor, noted for its architectural monuments, its fine library,
and its schools. Attalus III., at his death in 133, bequeathed to Rome
his kingdom, which included Lydia, Pisidia, Lycaonia, and Pamphylia.
It was made a province under the name of ASIA.

THE WAR WITH JUGURTHA.

After the destruction of Carthage, the most important kingdom in
Africa was NUMIDIA. It contained a number of flourishing towns, which
were centres of a considerable commerce. Masinissa left this kingdom
to his son Micipsa. The latter had two sons and a nephew, JUGURTHA.
The nephew was a brilliant young man, who had served under Scipio in
the Numantine war, and returned to Africa covered with honors. He was
named joint heir with his cousins to the kingdom of Numidia. Micipsa
dying soon after, Jugurtha murdered one of his cousins, Hiempsal,
claimed the whole kingdom, and attacked his other cousin, Adherbal,
who appealed to Rome. Commissioners were sent to investigate. They
were bought off by Jugurtha, and returned home without accomplishing
anything. Adherbal was afterwards captured, savagely tortured, and
finally killed.

The Senate, compelled by the popular indignation to make an
investigation, moved so slowly that some of its members were accused
of accepting bribes. War was declared at last, but the campaign
languished, and peace was soon made on such easy terms for the prince
that it was evident his money had again been freely used. The
scandalous transaction was denounced at Rome by the Tribune MEMMIUS.
Jugurtha then repaired to the city in person, and bought up all the
authorities except Memmius, whom he found incorruptible. He had
another cousin in the city, whom he caused to be murdered. After this
the Senate ordered him to leave, and as he departed, it is said he
exclaimed, "Venal city, destined soon to perish, if a purchaser be
found!"

War was now begun in earnest (110), but resulted in a crushing defeat
of the Romans, whose army was sent under the yoke. Humiliated by the
defeat, the Senate in the following year sent QUINTUS CAECILIUS
METELLUS, nephew of Metellus Macedonicus, to take charge of the war.
He was a man of integrity, with some experience as an officer, and a
rigid aristocrat. Realizing the danger of failure, he took with him as
his lieutenant the ablest soldier that he could find, GAIUS MARIUS.

Marius, born at Arpínum in 157, was the son of a farmer, and was
himself bred to the plough. He joined the army at an early age, and
soon attracted notice for his punctual performance of all duties, and
his strictness in discipline. He was present at the siege of Numantia,
and his courage caused Scipio to predict for him a brilliant career.
He soon rose to be Military Tribune. In 119 he was chosen Tribune of
the People, and two years later Praetor. The fact that he was
respected and valued in high circles is shown by his subsequent
marriage into the family of the Caesars. By this marriage with Julia,
the aunt of Julius Caesar, he became a person of social distinction.

The campaign was moderately successful. Jugurtha was defeated near the
river Muthul, and made to retire into the desert, where his
stronghold, Thala, was captured. He sued for peace, but, as
unconditional surrender was demanded, he still held out. The popular
party at Rome, irritated that such a petty prince should give so much
trouble, demanded that Marius should be made Consul and have charge of
the war. When the lieutenant asked Metellus for leave of absence to
enable him to be present at the elections, as was necessary according
to the law, his general ridiculed the idea, and told him to wait
another twenty years. He went, however, and was elected in 107, being
the first plebeian chosen to that office for more than a century.

Metellus was recalled, enjoyed a triumph, and received the agnomen of
NUMIDICUS.

Marius was every inch a soldier. He saw that the Roman legions must be
reorganized and better disciplined. He enlisted men who had no other
occupation, that they might become professional soldiers. Some men of
rank who had a taste for war also went with him. Among these was a
young patrician, CORNELIUS SULLA. With this army Marius soon wrested
from Jugurtha all his strongholds. In less than two years the war was
over. By his ally, Bocchus, King of Mauritania, Jugurtha was betrayed
(106) into the hands of Sulla, who was acting as the Quaestor of
Marius.

The western portion of Numidia was given to Bocchus as the reward of
his treachery, while the remainder continued to be governed by native
princes, until the civil war between Caesar and Pompey. In 104 Marius
returned home, and entered Rome in triumph. Jugurtha was thrown into a
dungeon, and there starved to death.




CHAPTER XXIII.

THE CIMBRI AND TEUTONES.--POLITICAL QUARRELS.


The war with Jugurtha ended none too soon, for Marius was needed in a
struggle requiring all his talents.

The CIMBRI and TEUTONES, barbarous nations from Northern Europe, were
threatening the frontiers of Italy. Already the Roman armies had met
with five successive defeats at their hands on the banks of the Rhone.
Eighty thousand Romans and forty thousand camp followers are said to
have fallen in these battles. Had the barbarians at this moment chosen
to enter Italy, the destruction of Rome would have been a certain
result. Fortunately, they turned to the Pyrenees, and, sweeping over
the mountains, overran for a season the province of Spain.

Marius, appointed Consul a second time, devoted his energies to
forming and training the army. He selected the plains on the banks of
the Rhone in Southern Gaul as best adapted for his purpose. Here he
drilled his troops, accustoming them to the greatest possible
exertions. Many perished under the strain, but the survivors became
hardened soldiers. Corps of engineers were attached to each legion,
and the soldiers were taught the use of tools, as well as of arms. At
length, in his fourth consulship (102), he felt prepared to meet the
enemy.

The barbarians, on their return from Spain, separated their forces,
the Cimbri marching around the northern foot of the Alps towards
Noricum, with the intention of invading Italy from that quarter, while
the Teutones remained in Gaul.

As the latter advanced, Marius took up his position in a fortified
camp near AQUAE SEXTIAE (Aix). He allowed the enemy to march past him,
and then followed cautiously, waiting for a favorable opportunity to
fall upon them. In the battle that followed, the barbarians were no
match for the drilled legionaries, who were irresistible. The contest
lasted two days, and the vast host of the Teutones was cut to pieces
(20 July, 102). At the close of this battle word was brought to Marius
that he had been elected Consul for the fifth time.

Meanwhile, the Cimbri had crossed the Alps and were ravaging the
fertile fields of Lombardy, meeting with but slight opposition from
Catulus, the other Consul.

The next year Marius came to his rescue. Near VERCELLAE the Cimbri met
the same fate as their brethren, and Italy was saved (101).

No sooner was the danger from the invasion over than political
quarrels broke out at Rome with great fury. Marius was elected Consul
for the sixth time. The popular heroes of the hour were two
demagogues, the Tribune SATURNÍNUS and the Praetor GLAUCIA. They
carried corn laws and land laws,[Footnote: These were the APPULEIAN
LAWS (100):--I. Any Roman citizen could buy corn of the state at a
nominal price. II. The land in Cisalpine Gaul, which the Cimbrians had
occupied, should be divided among the Italian and Roman citizens.
III. Colonies from the veterans of Marius were to be founded in
Sicily, Achaia, and Macedonia.] and compelled the Senators to take an
oath to execute their laws. Metellus Numidicus refusing to comply with
their wishes, Saturnínus sent a guard to the Senate-House, dragged him
out, and expelled him from the city.

During this troublesome time, Marius showed that he was no politician.
He lacked judgment and firmness, and by endeavoring to please all
parties he pleased none.

On the popular side there were two parties, the moderate one, led by
MEMMIUS, who had exposed the Senate in its dealings with Jugurtha, and
the radical one, led by Saturnínus and Glaucia. Memmius and Glaucia
both ran for the consulship, and as the former seemed likely to be
successful, he was murdered. A reaction then set in, and Saturnínus
and Glaucia were declared public enemies. They took refuge in the
Senate-House, the roof of which was torn off, and the wretches were
stoned to death.

The fall of Saturnínus and Glaucia was followed in 99 by the recall of
Metellus from banishment. He died shortly afterwards, and it was
suspected that he was a victim of treachery.

Marius having now become generally unpopular on account of his
vacillating course in the recent troubles, went into voluntary exile,
travelling through Asia Minor, and visiting the court of Mithradátes,
King of Pontus.

For the next eight years (99-91) Rome enjoyed a season of comparative
quiet.




CHAPTER XXIV.

INTERNAL HISTORY.-THE SOCIAL WAR (90-88).


At this time there was a bitter rivalry between the Senate and the
equestrian order, or commercial class. From the former were chosen the
governors of the provinces, from the latter came the tax-gatherers
(_publicani_) and the money-brokers (_negotiatores_). It will
help us to understand better the condition of affairs, if we study the
composition of the Senate and the Equites.

The Senators, three hundred in number (later their number was
increased to six hundred), held their office for life. When vacancies
occurred from death, or occasionally from removal, they were filled by
the Censor, [Footnote: See the duties of Censor] who appointed a
person that had held one of the following offices: Dictator, Consul,
Praetor, Curule Aedile, or, after the time of Sulla, Quaestor. All
persons who had held these offices, or that of Tribune, were allowed
to join in debate in the Senate, but not to vote. No Senator could
engage in business. Hence he must be wealthy.

We saw in Chapter IV. that Roman citizens were divided into six
classes according to their property, and that these classes were
subdivided into one hundred and ninety-three other classes called
centuries. About 225, the number was increased to three hundred and
seventy-three. Eighteen of the centuries of the first class were
called EQUITES, and must have property worth twenty thousand dollars
or more. This name was given to them because at first they served in
the army as horsemen, though in later times the cavalry was composed
only of allied troops. The Equites were originally from the
aristocracy alone, but, as the plebeians increased in wealth, many of
them became rich enough to be included in this class.

There was no hostility between the Senate and the Equites until, in
123, Gaius Gracchus passed the _Lex Judicaria_, which prescribed
that the jurors _(judices)_ should be chosen from the Equites,
and not the Senate. From this time dates the struggle between the two
classes, and the breach widened every year. On the one side were the
nobles, represented by the Senate; on the other side, the equestrian
order. Since the jurors were chosen from the latter, it had control of
the courts, and often made an unscrupulous use of its power,
especially in those courts which were established to try governors for
extortion in the management of provinces _(quaestiones rerum
repetundarum)_. From the Equites, too, were taken the tax-gatherers
of the provinces. They pillaged and robbed the people at will, and, if
a governor had the courage to interfere with them, a threat of
prosecution was held over his head. The average governor preferred to
connive at their exactions; the bolder ones paid with fines or exiles
for their courage. Another trouble was threatening the commonwealth.
The Italian allies of Rome did not possess the franchise belonging to
a Roman citizen. For nearly two centuries they had shared dangers and
victories with the Romans; they now eagerly demanded all their
privileges.

In 91, MARCUS LIVIUS DRUSUS, the Tribune, took up the task of reform.
He was noble, wealthy, and popular, and he hoped to settle the
question peacefully and equitably. But his attempt to reform the
courts displeased the Equites, his agrarian and corn laws made him
many enemies, and his attempt to admit the Italians to the rights of
Roman citizenship aroused great opposition.

His laws were passed, but the Senate pronounced them null and void. He
was denounced in that body as a traitor, and was struck down by an
assassin in the same year.

The death of Drusus drove the Italians to despair. Eight nations
entered into a close alliance, chose CORFINIUM, in the Pelignian
Apennines, as their capital, and formed a Federal Republic, to which
they gave the name ITALIA. All Italians were to be citizens of
Corfinium, and here was to be the place of assembly and the Senate-
House.

Rome, in the face of this danger, acted promptly and with resolution.
The Consuls, Lucius Julius Caesar and Publius Rutilius Lupus, both
took the field; with each were five lieutenants, among whom were
Marius and Sulla.

This war (90-88), called the SOCIAL WAR, i.e. the war with the allies
(_Socii_), was at first disastrous to Rome. The allies overran
Campania, defeated the Romans several times, and entered into
negotiations with the Northern Italians, whose fidelity began to
waver.

It is not strange, therefore, that opinions at Rome began to be turned
in the direction of a more liberal policy. It was decided to make
concessions. Towards the close of the year 90, the Consul Caesar
carried the JULIAN LAW, by which the Roman franchise was extended to
all who had not yet revolted. The next year this law was supplemented
by the PLAUTIAN PAPIRIAN LAW, which allowed every citizen of an
Italian town the franchise, if he handed in his name to the Praetor at
Rome within sixty days. About the same time was passed another law,
the CALPURNIAN, which permitted Roman magistrates in the field to
bestow the franchise on all who wished it. These laws resulted in
disorganizing the rebellion. The Samnites and Lucanians held out the
longest, but were finally put down by Marius.

The end of the Social War brought no peace at Rome. The newly
enfranchised Italians were not fully satisfied. The Senate was torn
asunder by violent personal rivalries. There was no class not affected
by the wide-spread tightness in the money market. The treasury was
empty, and many capitalists became insolvent. War with Mithradátes,
King of Pontus, had been declared, and both Marius and Sulla were
eager to have the command.

At this time (88) the TRIBUNE PUBLIUS SULPICIUS RUFUS brought forward
the following bills:--

1. That the command of the war against Mithradátes be given to Marius.

2. That the new citizens should be distributed through all the tribes.

3. That any Senator who owed more than four hundred dollars be
deprived of his seat.

4. That those exiled on suspicion of having aided in the Italian
revolt be recalled.

In spite of the bitterest opposition, these bills were passed. But the
triumph of Sulpicius was of short duration. Sulla, who with his troops
had been encamping near Nola in Campania, marched upon the city, and
for the first time a Consul entered Rome at the head of his legions.




CHAPTER XXV.

MARIUS AND SULLA.-CINNA.


With the name of MARIUS is usually coupled that of LUCIUS CORNELIUS
SULLA (138-78). "He was a patrician of the purest blood, had inherited
a moderate fortune, and had spent it, like other young men of rank,
lounging in theatres and amusing himself with dinner parties. He was a
poet, an artist, and a wit. Although apparently indolent, he was
naturally a soldier, statesman, and diplomatist. As Quaestor under
Marius in the Jugurthine War, he had proved a most active and useful
officer." In these African campaigns he showed that he knew how to win
the hearts and confidence of his soldiers; and through his whole
subsequent career, the secret of his brilliant successes seems to have
been the enthusiastic devotion of his troops, whom he always held well
under control, even when they were allowed to indulge in plunder and
license. It was to Sulla's combined adroitness and courage that Marius
owed the final capture of Jugurtha. He served again under Marius in
the campaigns against the Cimbri and Teutones, and gave efficient help
towards the victory. But the Consul became jealous of his rising
power, and all friendly feeling between the two ceased.

After this campaign Sulla lived at Rome for some years, taking no part
in politics, and during this time his name and that of his rival are
almost unheard. He appeared before the public again in 93, when he was
elected Praetor, and increased his popularity by an exhibition of a
hundred lions in the arena, matched against Numidian archers. In 92 he
went as Propraetor to govern the province of Asia, and here he first
met MITHRADÁTES.

This monarch, who ruled over Pontus, was an extraordinary man. He
spoke many languages, was the idol, of his subjects, and had boundless
ambition. He doubted the durability of the Roman Empire, and began to
enlarge his own territory, with no apparent fear of Rome's
interference.

Cappadocia, a neighboring country, was under Roman protection, and was
ruled by a prince, ARIOBARZÁNES, that Rome had recognized. This
country Mithradátes attacked. He killed the prince, and placed on the
throne his own nephew.

Rome interfered, and Sulla was instructed to visit the monarch. He
accomplished his mission with his usual adroitness, and returned to
Rome with new honors. He took an active part in the Social War,
eclipsing the fame of his rival, Marius. He was now the recognized
leader of the conservative and aristocratic party. The feeling between
the rivals was more bitter than ever, for Marius, though old, had by
no means lost his prestige with the popular party.

It was at this time that Mithradátes, learning of the Social War,
thought it a good opportunity to advance his own interests and extend
his realm. He collected all his available forces, and invaded
Bithynia. With his fleets he sailed through the Dardanelles into the
Archipelago. The extortions of the Roman governors had been so great,
that Ionia, Lydia, and Caria, with all the islands near Asia Minor,
gladly revolted from Rome, and accepted his protection. All the Roman
residents with their families were massacred on a single day. It is
said that 80,000 persons perished. Mithradátes himself next crossed
the Bosphorus, and marched into Northern Greece, which received him
with open arms.

Such was the condition in the East when Sulpicius Rufus carried the
bills mentioned in the last chapter. One of these bills was that
Marius have charge of the war against Mithradátes. This was not to
Sulla's liking. He was in Campania with the legions that had served in
the Social War. The soldiers were devoted to him, and ready to follow
him anywhere. Sulla, therefore, taking matters into his own hands,
marched into the city at the head of his troops. The people resisted;
Sulpicius was slain; Marius fled for his life, and retired to Africa,
where he lived for a time, watching the course of events.

Sulla could not remain long at the capital. The affairs of the East
called him away; and no sooner was he gone than the flames of civil
war burst out anew (87).

LUCIUS CORNELIUS CINNA, a friend of Marius, was Consul that year. He
tried to recall Marius, but was violently opposed and finally driven
from the city. The Senate declared him deposed from his office. He
invoked the aid of the soldiers in Campania, and found them ready to
follow him. The neighboring Italian towns sent him men and money, and
Marius, coming from Africa, joined him with six thousand troops. They
marched upon Rome. The city was captured. Cinna was acknowledged
Consul, and the sentence of outlawry which had been passed on Marius
was revoked.

The next year Marius was made Consul for the seventh time, and Cinna
for the second. Then followed the wildest cruelties. Marius had a
body-guard of slaves, which he sent out to murder whomever he wished.
The houses of the rich were plundered, and the honor of noble families
was exposed to the mercy of the slaves. Fortunately Marius died
sixteen days after he entered office, and the shedding of blood
ceased.

For the next three years Cinna ruled Rome. Constitutional government
was practically suspended. For the years 85 and 84 Cinna himself and a
trusty colleague were Consuls, but no regular elections were held. In
84, he was murdered, when on the eve of setting out against Sulla in
Asia.

Sulla left Italy for the East with 30,000 troops. He marched against
Athens, where Archeláus, the general of Mithradátes, was intrenched.
After a long siege, he captured and pillaged the city, March 1, 86.
The same year he defeated Archeláus at CHAERONÉA in Boeotia, and the
next year at ORCHOMENOS.

Meanwhile Sulla's lieutenant, LUCULLUS, raised a fleet and gained two
victories off the coast of Asia Minor. The Asiatic king was now ready
to negotiate. Sulla crossed the Hellespont in 84, and in a personal
interview with the king arranged the terms of peace, which were as
follows. The king was to give up Bithynia, Paphlagonia, and
Cappadocia, and withdraw to his former dominions. He was also to pay
an indemnity amounting to about $3,500,000, and surrender eighty ships
of war.

Having thus settled matters with the king, Sulla punished the Lydians
and Carians, in whose territory the Romans had been massacred, by
compelling them to pay at one time five years' tribute. He was now
ready to return to Rome.

The same year that Cinna died, Sulla landed at Brundisium, with 40,000
troops and a large following of nobles who had fled from Rome. Every
preparation was made by the Marian party for his reception; but no
sooner did he land in Italy than the soldiers were induced to desert
to him in immense numbers, and he soon found himself in possession of
all Lower Italy. Among those who hastened to his standard was young
POMPEY, then but twenty-three years old, and it was to his efforts
that Sulla's success was largely due. The next year, 83, the Marian
party was joined by the Samnites, and the war raged more fiercely than
ever. At length, however, Sulla was victorious under the walls of
Rome. The city lay at his mercy. His first act, an order for the
slaughter of 6,000 Samnite prisoners, was a fit prelude to his conduct
in the city. Every effort was made to eradicate the last trace of
Marian blood and sympathy from the city. A list of men, declared to be
outlaws and public enemies, was exhibited in the Forum, and a
succession of wholesale murders and confiscations throughout Rome and
Italy, made the name of Sulla forever infamous.

Having received the title of Dictator, and celebrated a splendid
triumph for the Mithradátic war, he carried (80-79) his political
measures. The main object of these was to invest the Senate, the
thinned ranks of which he filled with his own creatures, with full
control over the state, over every magistrate and every province.

In 79 he resigned his dictatorship and went to Puteoli, where he died
the next year, from a loathsome disease brought on by his excesses.


THE REFORMS OF SULLA.

Sulla restricted the power of the magistrates to the advantage of the
Senate. Senators were alone made eligible for the tribuneship, and no
former Tribune could hold any curule office. No one could be Praetor
without having first been Quaestor, or Consul without having held the
praetorship. Every candidate for the office of Quaestor must be at
least thirty years old. The number of Praetors was increased from six
to eight; that of Quaestors, from twelve to twenty. The Consuls and
Praetors were to remain at Rome during their first year of office, and
then go to the provinces as Proconsuls and Propraetors.

Three hundred new Senators, taken from the Equites, were added, and
all who had been Quaestors were made eligible to the Senate.

The control of the courts was transferred from the Equites to the
Senate.

On the death of Sulla, in 78, CRASSUS and LEPIDUS were chosen Consuls;
but such was the instability of the times that they were sworn not to
raise an army during their consulship. Lepidus attempted to evade his
oath by going to Gaul, and, when summoned by the Senate to return,
marched against the city at the head of his forces. He was defeated by
Crassus and Pompey in 78, and soon after died.




CHAPTER XXVI.

SERTORIUS.--SPARTACUS.--LUCULLUS.--POMPEY AND CRASSUS.


Quintus Sertorius (121-72), a native of the little Sabine village of
Nursia under the Apennines, had joined the party of Marius, and served
under him in the campaigns against the Cimbri and Teutones. In 97 he
served in Spain, and became acquainted with the country with which his
fame is chiefly associated. In 91 he was Quaestor in Cisalpine Gaul.
He was a partisan of Marius during his troubles with Sulla, and on
Sulla's return from the East he left Rome for Spain, where he took the
lead of the Marian party. His bravery, kindness, and eloquence pleased
the Spaniards. Many Roman refugees and deserters joined him. He
defeated one of Sulla's generals, and drove out of Lusitania
(Portugal) METELLUS PIUS,[Footnote: Son of Metellus Numidicus. He
received the agnomen of Pius on account of the love which he displayed
for his father, whom he begged the people to recall from banishment in
99.] who had been specially sent against him from Rome.

The object of Sertorius was to establish a government in Spain after
the Roman model. He formed a Senate of three hundred members, and
founded at Osca a school for native children. He was strict and severe
towards his soldiers, but kind to the people. A white fawn was his
favorite pet and constant follower. He ruled Spain for six years. In
77 he was joined by PERPERNA a Roman officer. The same year Pompey,
then a young man, was sent to co-operate with Metellus. Sertorius
proved more than a match for both of these generals, and defeated them
near Saguntum.

The position of the Romans was becoming critical, for Sertorius now
formed a league with the pirates of the Mediterranean. He also entered
into negotiations with Mithradátes, and opened correspondence with the
slaves in Italy, who were rebelling.

But intrigues and jealousies arose in his camp. The outcome of these
was that he was treacherously murdered by Perperna at a banquet in 72,
and with his death fell the Marian party in Spain.

Meanwhile a dangerous enemy was threatening Italy within her own
borders. In 73 a band of gladiators, under the leadership of one of
their number, named SPARTACUS escaped from the training school at
Capua and took up a strong position on Mount Vesuvius. They were
joined by large numbers of slaves and outcasts of every description,
and were soon in a position to defeat two Praetors who were sent
against them.

The next year they assumed the offensive; and Spartacus found himself
at the head of 100,000 men. Four generals sent against him were
defeated; and for two years he ravaged Italy at will, and even
threatened Rome. But intestine division showed itself in his ranks;
his lieutenants grew jealous of him, and his strength began to wane.

In 71 the command of the war was given to CRASSUS, who finished it in
six months. Spartacus fell, fighting bravely, near Brundisium. Pompey,
returning from the Sertorian war in Spain, met five thousand of those
who had escaped from the array of Spartacus. These he slew to a man.
Crassus pointed the moral of his victory by hanging, along the road
from Rome to Capua, six thousand captives whom he had taken.

Mithradátes meanwhile, taking advantage of the troubles at Rome, was
again in arms, and in 74 LUCIUS LICINIUS LUCULLUS was sent against
him.

Lucullus, of plebeian birth, first distinguished himself in the Social
War, where he gained the favor of Sulla, and accompanied him, as
Quaestor, in his campaign against Mithradátes in 88. With Cotta he was
chosen to the consulship in 74. The province of Cilicia was assigned
to him, Bithynia to Cotta. Mithradátes invaded Bithynia, defeated
Cotta, and besieged him at Chalcédon.

Lucullus, after reorganizing and disciplining his army, went to the
aid of his colleague, drove the king into Pontus, and defeated him at
Cabíra in 72, and his fleet at Tenedos in 71, compelling him to take
refuge with his son-in-law, TIGRÁNES, King of Armenia.

Lucullus endeavored to work reforms in the administration of
provincial governments in the East. The revenues of the provinces were
farmed out, and the measures of Lucullus were intended to protect the
tax-payers against the tax-gatherers (_publicani_). His reforms
met with bitter opposition at Rome, especially from the Equites, whose
chief source of income was often this same tax-farming. Intrigues
against him by persons sent from Rome began to create dissatisfaction
among his troops. He had been a severe disciplinarian, and so it was
all the easier to turn the soldiers against him.

In 68 he won a victory over Tigránes and Mithradátes, at the river
Arsanias; but his legions refused to follow him farther, and he was
obliged to lead them into winter quarters in Mesopotamia. The next
year his soldiers again mutinied, and he was replaced by Pompey.

Returning to Rome, Lucullus spent the rest of his days in retirement,
dying about 57. He was very rich, and was famed for the luxurious
dinners which he gave.


POMPEY AND CRASSUS.

The Sullan system stood for nine years, and was then overthrown, as it
had been established, by a soldier. It was the fortune of Pompey, a
favorite officer of Sulla, to cause the first violation of the laws
laid down by his general.

GNEIUS POMPEIUS MAGNUS (106-48) led a soldier's life from his boyhood
to his death. When a youth of seventeen he fought by his father's side
in the civil struggles between Marius and Sulla. He was a partisan of
the latter, and connected himself with the cause of the aristocracy.
He defeated the followers of Marius in Sicily and Africa, and in 81
was allowed to enjoy a triumph, though still an Eques and not legally
qualified. Sulla then greeted him with the surname of Magnus, which he
ever afterwards bore. He was then sent to Spain, with what success we
have seen in the previous chapter. In 70 Pompey and MARCUS LICINIUS
CRASSUS were elected Consuls amid great enthusiasm.

Crassus (108-53), the conqueror of Spartacus, had amassed immense
wealth by speculation, mining, dealing in slaves, and other methods.
Avarice is said to have been his ruling passion, though he gave large
sums to the people for political effect.

Neither Pompey nor Crassus, according to the laws passed by Sulla, was
eligible to the consulship. The former had never been Quaestor, and
was only thirty-five years old; the latter was still Praetor, and
ought to have waited two years.

The work of Sulla was now quickly undone. The Tribunes regained their
prerogative, the veto. The control of the criminal courts was
transferred again from the Senate to the Equites, and the former body
was cleared of its most worthless members, who had been appointed by
Sulla.

For three years (70-67) after the expiration of his consulship, Pompey
remained quietly at Rome. He was then put in charge of an expedition
against the Greek pirates. From the earliest times these marauders had
been in the habit of depredating on the shores of the Mediterranean.
During the civil wars of Rome they had become much bolder, so that the
city was compelled to take an active part against them. They had
paralyzed the trade of the Mediterranean, and even the coasts of Italy
were not safe from their raids.

GABINIUS, a Tribune, proposed that Pompey should hold his command for
three years; that he should have supreme authority over all Roman
magistrates in the provinces throughout the Mediterranean, and over
the coasts for fifty miles inland. He was to have fifteen lieutenants,
all ex-praetors, two hundred ships, and all the troops he needed.

In three months the pirates were swept from the sea.

The next year (66) Pompey's powers were still further enlarged by the
MANILIAN LAW, proposed by the Tribune Manilius. By this law the entire
control of the Roman policy in the East was given to Pompey. His
appointment was violently opposed by the Senate, especially by
CATULUS, the "father of the Senate," and by the orator HORTENSIUS; but
CICERO with his first political speech (_Pro Lege Manilia_) came
to Pompey's assistance, and to him was given the command by which he
became virtually dictator in the East. His operations there were
thoroughly successful, and, though he doubtless owed much to the
previous victories of Lucullus, he showed himself an able soldier.
Mithradátes was obliged to flee across the Black Sea to Panticapaeum
(Kertch).

In the year 64 Pompey went to Syria, took possession of the country in
the name of Rome, and made it a province.

Next he was invited to act as judge between Hyrcánus and Aristobúlus,
two aspirants to the Jewish throne. His decision was contrary to the
wishes of the people, and to enforce it he led his army against
Jerusalem, which he captured after a siege of three months. He
installed Hyrcánus on the throne on condition of an annual tribute.

Meanwhile Mithradátes had returned to Pontus for the prosecution of
his old design; but so great was the terror inspired by the Roman
arms, that even his own son refused to join him. Desperate at the turn
affairs had taken, the aged monarch put an end to his own life in 63,
after a reign of fifty-seven years. With him ceased for many years all
formidable opposition to Rome in Asia.

Besides Syria, Pontus, to which Bithynia was joined, and Crete were
now made provinces. Cilicia was reorganized, and enlarged by the
addition of Pamphylia and Isauria. The three countries in Asia Minor
not yet provinces, but dependencies, were Galatia, ruled by Deiotarus;
Cappadocia, by Ariobarzánes; and Paphlagonia, by Attalus.

After an absence of nearly seven years, Pompey returned to Rome,
January 1, 61, and enjoyed a well earned triumph. He was forty-five
years old, had accomplished a really great work, had founded several
cities which afterwards became centres of Greek life and civilization,
and was hailed as the conqueror of Spain, Africa, and Asia.

The rest of Pompey's life is closely connected with that of Caesar.
His wife, Julia, was Caesar's daughter, and thus far the relations
between the two men had been friendly.

Pompey's absence in the East was marked at Rome by the rise to
political importance of CAESAR and CICERO, and by the conspiracy of
CATILINE.




CHAPTER XXVII.

CAESAR.--CICERO.--VERRES.


The Caesars were a family belonging to the Julian _gens_, which
claimed descent from IÚLUS, the son of AENÉAS. Eight generations of
Caesars had held prominent places in the commonwealth. They had been
Consuls, Praetors, Censors, Aediles, and were aristocrats of the
moderate wing. The direct ancestry of GAIUS JULIUS CAESAR can be
traced no further back than his grandfather. This gentleman, of the
same name as the great Caesar, married Marcia, who claimed descent
from Ancus Marcius, the fourth King of Rome. They had three children,
Gaius Julius, the father of the Dictator, Sextus Julius, and Julia,
who became the wife of Marius. Gaius Julius held no higher office than
Praetor. He was married to Aurelia, a stately woman of simple and
severe tastes. Their son Gaius was born on July 12th, 100.

During Cinna's consulship (86), Caesar is first mentioned as a youth,
tall, slight, handsome, with dark, piercing eyes, sallow complexion,
and features refined and intellectual. The bloody scenes attending the
proscription of his uncle Marius, to whose party his father belonged,
must have made a deep impression upon him. One of his most intimate
companions was CICERO, who was six years his senior.

Marius had seen in his nephew the materials which make great men, and
determined to help him to promotion. He made him, when scarcely
fifteen, a priest of Jupiter (_flamen dialis_), which sacred
office carried with it a handsome income.

Shortly after the death of his father, in 84, Caesar married Cornelia,
the daughter of Cinna. By this marriage he was connected more closely
with the popular party, whose champion he remained.

When Sulla returned to Rome from his Eastern campaign, Caesar was but
eighteen. In the wholesale murders that followed, his party was
ruined, his nearest friends dispersed or killed. He himself was yet
free from proscription, for Sulla wished to win such a promising young
man to his own side. He made proposals that Caesar divorce his wife
and marry one whom he might select. Caesar refused. Force was then
tried. His priesthood was taken from him, and his wife's dowry. His
estate was confiscated, and, when this had no effect, he was himself
declared an outlaw, and a price was set on his head. Influential
friends, however, interceded in his behalf, and the Dictator was
finally persuaded to pardon him; but with reluctance, and with the
remark that in Caesar was the making of many a Marius. The youth then
left Italy, and joined the army in Asia.

Here Caesar served his apprenticeship as a soldier. He joined the
forces of the Praetor Thermus, who had been sent against the pirates
that were making their head-quarters in Lesbos. The Praetor, finding
his troops insufficient to accomplish his work, sent Caesar to
Nicomédes, a Roman ally and the King of Bithynia, to obtain additional
forces. He was successful in his mission, and, upon his return to
Lesbos, distinguished himself for his bravery in the attack upon
Mityléne, and was awarded the oak wreath, a coveted honor, for saving
the life of a fellow-soldier.

Caesar is next seen in Cilicia, serving under Servilius, in a campaign
against the pirates who were marauding along the coast of that
country. While here he was informed of Sulla's death, and at once left
the army and returned home (77). The next year he began his struggle
with the nobility by prosecuting for extortion Dolabella, a former
Governor of Macedonia. Dolabella was a favorite of the Senate, and his
cause was theirs. The best talent was engaged to defend him, and
Caesar lost the case.

Feeling his deficiency as an orator, Caesar went to Rhodes and studied
rhetoric under the famous Apollonius. He had recovered his property
and priesthood, and could well afford the time. While on his way he
was captured by pirates, and not released until a ransom of some
$50,000 was raised and paid. Upon arriving at Milétus he at once got
together some vessels, returned to the island where he had been in
captivity, seized the crew of pirates, took them to Pergamus, and had
them tried, convicted, and crucified. He then resumed his journey to
Rhodes, where he remained two years in the pursuit of his studies.
Then the report of the uprisal of Mithradátes reached him, and he at
once crossed over to the mainland, collected a body of volunteers, and
saved Caria to Rome.

Having finished his studies, Caesar returned to Rome and lived quietly
for a time with his wife and mother, watching the course of events.

While Caesar was thus preparing himself for the great struggle in
which he was destined to take the leading part, Cicero, the companion
of his youth, was beginning to attract attention at Rome.

MARCUS TULLIUS CICERO (106-43) was a townsman of Marius. He belonged
to the Equites, and received a good education under the best Greek
teachers. As he ripened into manhood, he chose in politics the party
opposed to Caesar, and for a profession he selected the bar, hoping to
gain fame as a speaker before the Senate, and finally to become one of
its members. He took part in the Social War (89), but during the
troubled times that followed he remained quietly engaged in literary
pursuits. His first public oration (80), the defence of Roscius, who
was falsely accused of murdering his father, was a great success, and
guaranteed for him a brilliant future. Cicero improved the next few
years by study and travel in Asia and Greece. Shortly after his
return, in 75, he was elected Quaestor, and thus became a member of
the Senate. His year of office he spent in Sicily, in the performance
of his duties. There he obtained an insight into the corrupt
extortions of the Roman governors. Five years later, he conducted his
famous case against Verres.

VERRES had been a follower of Sulla, and during the proscriptions had
amassed some property. Afterwards he held official positions in Greece
and Asia, where he became notorious for his greediness and cruelty.
With the money thus acquired, he had bought his election to the
praetorship, became Senator, and was sent by his colleagues to govern
Sicily. His government there may have been no worse than that of many
other proconsuls in the different provinces, but we have a fuller
account of it owing to the prosecution of Cicero, whose speeches
against Verres are preserved.

Verres was Governor of Sicily for three years. In his official
position, he was judge of all civil and criminal cases. Every suit
brought before him he gave to the party that could pay him best.
Property was confiscated on false charges, and works of art of great
value were stolen. By such a course Verres collected, it is said,
property to the value of $4,000,000. Two thirds of this he expected to
spend in silencing accusations. The rest he hoped to enjoy in peace,
but Cicero's eloquence forced him to abandon his defence and retire
into exile.

It was about this time that Caesar finished his rhetorical studies
abroad, and returned home. He was elected Military Tribune as a reward
for what he had accomplished in Caria. Two years later, in 68, he was
elected Quaestor, thereby acquiring a seat in the Senate. At this time
his aunt Julia died, and, as one of her nearest relatives, he
delivered the funeral oration.

Caesar was now beginning to know Pompey, and saw that their interests
were common. The latter, although but six years older, was already a
great man and a distinguished soldier. Cornelia, Caesar's wife, died,
and he married for a second wife Pompeia, the cousin of Pompey. When
sent as Quaestor to Farther Spain, in 67, he completed the work begun
by Pompey and settled the finances of the troubled country, a task
which he found the easier as he was known to belong to the popular
party, of which Marius and Sertorius had been leaders.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

TROUBLES AT ROME.--CONSPIRACY OF CATILINE.


While Pompey was absent in the East, matters at Rome were daily becoming
worse, and shaping themselves for the speedy overthrow of the Republic.
There were many who had suffered under Sulla, and who were
anxious to regain what they had lost, and there were many who,
enriched by the Dictator, had squandered their ill-gotten wealth, and
now only waited a leader to renew the assault upon the state. The
Senate was jealous of the power of the people, and the people
distrusted the Senate.

Among the patricians who were aspiring to the consulship was LUCIUS
SERGIUS CATILÍNA, a villain steeped in every crime, but adroit, bold,
and withal captivating. In 68 he had been Praetor, the next year
Governor in Africa, where by his extortions he had obtained enough
money, as he hoped, to purchase his election to the consulship. On his
return home he was impeached for his misgovernment, but acquitted
through Cicero's defence and the careful selection of a jury.

He then came forward as candidate for the consulship of the next year
(63). There were two other candidates, Antonius, the uncle of Mark
Antony, and Cicero himself. Antony was sure of an election, so the
struggle was really between Catiline and Cicero. The latter was
elected, owing to the popularity he had acquired by his prosecution of
Verres and his defence of the Manilian Law. Thus Cicero reached the
goal for which he had been so long striving.

Caesar was rising at the same time. The year previous (65) he had been
Curule Aedile, had built a row of costly columns in front of the
Capitol, and erected a temple to the Dioscúri (Castor and Pollux). But
what made him especially pleasing to the populace was his lavish
display at the public games and exhibitions.

Caesar was now looked upon as a prominent democratic leader. In 63 the
office of Pontifex Maximus, the head of the state religion, became
vacant by the death of its occupant, Metellus Pius. Caesar became a
candidate for the office, and was elected, receiving more votes than
both the rival candidates combined. He also received further evidence
of the popular favor by being chosen Praetor for the next year (62).

Cicero's consulship would have closed without adding anything to his
fame had it not been for Catiline. The latter's failure to be elected
caused him to enter into a plot to seize and burn the city. He had
many followers, men of noble families, among whom were the former
Consul Lentulus, who had been recently expelled from the Senate by the
Censors, and Cethégus, a bankrupt spendthrift, who was anxious to
regain a fortune by a change in government. There were veterans of
Sulla, starving peasants who had been dispossessed of their farms, and
outlaws of every description. The conspirators were divided into two
parties; those outside of the city, headed by Marcus Manlius, whose
head-quarters were at Faesulae (Fiesole), where was gathered an army
of trained soldiers; and those inside of the city, headed by Catiline.
Here secret meetings were held, the purpose of which was to excite an
uprising, kill the magistrates, seize the government, and then unite
with the army in Etruria. Cicero was informed of these meetings by
spies, and just before the plans for the uprising were matured, he
disclosed them to the Senate.

Catiline fled from Rome; but his accomplices, of whom Lentulus and
Cethégus were the most prominent, were arrested in the city. A serious
difficulty now arose as to the disposition of the prisoners. Lentulus
was at that time Praetor, and the persons of public officers were
sacred. The Sempronian Law of Gracchus forbade the executing of any
Roman citizen without giving him a right of appeal to the Assembly.
Too many were implicated in the conspiracy for this to be safe.

In the debate in the Senate, the principal speakers were Caesar, Cato,
and Cicero.

Cato and Cicero advocated immediate death; Caesar, imprisonment for
life. The motives of the men are so characteristic that they form a
complete key to their several public careers. Cicero, vain and
selfish, weak in council, and distrustful of the temper of the people
and of his own ability to rule their factions, feared that they would
become dangerous enemies to himself; Cato, desiring the reformation of
the state, would make an example and warning for the future. The one,
forgetful of the state, was overcome by personal fears; the other,
unmindful of self, would have purity at any cost.

Caesar, on the other hand, wished everything done in strict accordance
with the laws; as a bold and wise statesman, he urged that nothing was
more impolitic than lawless violence on the part of the rulers. Cicero
was the timid magistrate; Cato, the injudicious reformer; but Caesar,
with his keener knowledge and stronger hand, was the safer guide.

A sentence of death was voted; and Cicero, with unseemly haste, caused
the conspirators to be strangled that same night (December 5, 63). The
suppression of the conspiracy in the city was followed by the defeat
of the army in Etruria. Thither Catiline had fled, and there he fell
fighting with desperate courage at the head of his motley force of
soldiers near Pistoria.

The name of "Father of his Country" was given to Cicero for the
vigilance shown in this affair.

The execution of Lentulus and Cethégus resulted as Caesar had
expected. It was a lawless act on the part of the Consul and the
Senate, and it was felt that by it the constitution was still more
endangered. The people demanded that Pompey return. In him they
thought to have a deliverer from internal strifes.

Cicero was wrapped up in his own conceit, imagining himself a second
Romulus. On the last day of the year (63), as was the custom of the
retiring Consuls, he arose in the Forum to deliver a speech, reviewing
the acts of his year of consulship. Metellus Nepos, a Tribune, forbade
his speaking, on the ground that one who had put to death Roman
citizens without a hearing did not deserve to be heard. Amid the
uproar Cicero could only shout that he had saved his country. Metellus
threatened to impeach him, and excitement in the city was at fever
heat. The Tribune moved before the Assembly that Pompey be recalled.
The Senate feared his coming. Caesar, who was now Praetor (judge),
favored it, and earnestly seconded the proposal of Metellus. Cato, who
was also Tribune, ordered Metellus to stop speaking, and snatched his
manuscript from his hand. The aristocrats drew their swords, and broke
up the meeting. Constitutional law was trampled under foot on all
sides. The Senate was riding rough-shod over all opponents. Metellus
and Caesar were declared deposed from their offices. The people,
however, believed in Caesar. He was followed to his home by crowds,
who begged him to be their leader, and make an example of the law-
breakers in the Senate. But Caesar refused. He would have nothing to
do with lawlessness; he let his opponents play that _rôle_, and
awaited the results. The Senate soon saw its mistake, and requested
him to resume his official duties.

The next year (61) Caesar was sent to Farther Spain as Propraetor. He
had already left a favorable impression there as Quaestor. Portions of
the country were still unsubdued. Many of the mountain passes were
held by robbers, whose depredations caused much trouble. He completed
the subjugation of the peninsula, put down the brigands, reorganized
the government, and sent large sums of money to the treasury at Rome.
His administration was thorough and complete, and a just reward for it
would, he hoped, be the consulship.

Meanwhile Pompey had returned from the East. He landed at Brundisium
in December, 62, and proceeded with a large band of captured princes
and immense treasures to Rome, which he entered in triumph amidst the
greatest enthusiasm. By a special vote of the Senate he was permitted
to wear his triumphal robe in that body whenever he pleased.

Caesar returned from Spain in 60, with wealth and military fame.
Though feared and detested by the Senate, he was the favorite of the
people, and could depend upon their support. Pompey had the army
behind him. He received Caesar with pleasure, for he had been a friend
in all his career.

Caesar felt that, with the people and the army through Pompey on his
side, he only needed the capitalists to make his success sure. CRASSUS
was counted as the richest man at Rome. He was won over. These three
then formed what is known as the FIRST TRIUMVIRATE,--"a union of
shrewdness, renown, and riches," by which Caesar expected to rise to
great power, Pompey to retain his power, and Crassus to gain greater
wealth.




CHAPTER XXIX.

THE FIRST TRIUMVIRATE.


Pompey was ostensibly at the head of the first Triumvirate, and in
return supported Caesar in his candidacy for the consulship. Crassus
was to contribute his wealth to influence the election. Caesar was
elected without opposition (59); his colleague, the Senate's tool, was
Marcus Bibulus.

Caesar had now reached the highest round in the ladder of political
offices. He had shown himself in all his course to be careful in
keeping within the bounds of the constitution, never exerting himself
in political quarrels except to defend the law against lawlessness.
Now he was in a position to push his ideas of reform, and to show the
aristocracy of what stuff he was made.

It would have been well for Cicero, and better for the state, had the
orator been willing to join hands with Caesar and Pompey; but he was
too vain of his own glory to join hands with those who were his
superiors, and he clung to the Senate, feeling that his talents would
shine there more, and be more likely to redound to his own personal
fame.

Caesar's consulship increased his popularity among all except the
aristocrats. His AGRARIAN LAW, carefully framed and worded, was
bitterly opposed by the Senate, especially by his colleague, Bibulus,
and by Cato. The law provided that large tracts of the _ager
publicus_, then held on easy terms by the rich patricians, be
distributed among the veterans of Pompey. Caesar proposed to pay the
holders a reasonable sum for their loss, though legally they had no
claim whatever on the land. Although Bibulus interfered, Cato raved,
and the Tribunes vetoed, still the Assembly passed the law, and voted
in addition that the Senate be obliged to take an oath to observe it.

The LEGES JULIAE were a code of laws which Caesar drew up during his
year of office. They mark an era in Roman law, for they cover many
crimes the commission of which had been for a long time undermining
the state.

The most important of these was the LEX DE REPETUNDIS, aimed at the
abuses of governors of provinces. It required all governors to make a
double return of their accounts, one to be left in the province open
for inspection, the other to be kept at Rome.

When Caesar's term of office was nearly ended, he obtained from the
reluctant Senate his appointment as Proconsul of Gaul for five years.
He must leave the city, however, in safe hands, otherwise all his work
would be undone. He managed the consular elections for the next year
(58) so adroitly, that Piso and Gabinius, on whose friendship he could
rely, were elected.

There were in Rome, however, two men whom it would be dangerous for
Caesar to leave behind. Cato, the ultra aristocrat, hated him
bitterly. Cicero, whose ambition was to lead the Senate, a body only
too willing to crush Caesar, might do him great harm. It was Caesar's
good fortune, or, as some believe, the result of his own scheming,
that both these men were put temporarily out of the way.

CLODIUS PULCHER was a young aristocrat, notorious for his wildness. At
one time, by assuming the dress of a woman, he had gained admittance
to the festival of _Bona Dea_, which was celebrated only by
women. He was discovered and brought to trial before the Senate, but
acquitted by means of open bribery. Cicero had been instrumental in
bringing him to trial, and Clodius never forgot it. He got adopted
into a plebeian family in order to be a candidate for the tribuneship,
and was successful. He then proposed to the Assembly that any person
who had put to death a Roman citizen without allowing him to appeal to
the people be considered a violator of the constitution. The proposal
was carried. All knew that Cicero was meant, and he fled at once to
Macedonia. His property was confiscated, his houses were destroyed,
and his palace in the city was dedicated to the Goddess of Liberty.

The kingdom of Cyprus, which had long been attached to that of Egypt,
had been bequeathed to Rome at the death of Ptolemy Alexander in 80.
The Senate had delayed to accept the bequest, and meanwhile the island
was ruled by Ptolemy of Cyprus, one of the heirs of the dead king.

Clodius, on the plea that this king harbored pirates, persuaded the
Assembly to annex the island, and to send Cato to take charge of it.
He accepted the mission, and was absent two years. His duties were
satisfactorily performed, and he returned with about $7,000,000 to
increase the Roman treasury. Thus, Cicero and Cato being out of the
city, the Senate was without a leader who could work injury in
Caesar's absence.




CHAPTER XXX.

CAESAR'S CAMPAIGNS IN GAUL.


Caesar was now in the prime of manhood, in the full vigor of mind and
body. His previous experience in camp life had been comparatively
small. His early service in Asia, and his more recent campaigns in
Spain, however, had shown his aptitude for military life.

The Romans had already obtained a foothold in Gaul. Since 118, the
southern part of the country along the seaboard had been a Roman
province, called GALLIA NARBONENSIS, from the colony of Narbo which
the Romans had founded. The rest of Gaul included all modern France,
and a part of Switzerland, Holland, and Belgium. The inhabitants were
all of the Celtic race, except a few Germans who had crossed the Rhine
and settled in the North, and the AQUITÁNI, who lived in the Southwest
and who are represented by the Basques of to-day.

The Gauls were more or less civilized since they had come into contact
with the Romans, but they still had the tribal form of government,
like the early Romans. There were more than fifty of these tribes,
which were mostly hostile to one another, as well as divided into
factions among themselves. This condition favored a conquest, for the
factions were frequently Roman and non-Roman. Two of the chief tribes
were the AEDUI and SEQUANI. The former had been taken under the
protection of Rome; the latter, impatient of control and Roman
influence, had invited a tribe of Germans under Ariovistus to come
into Gaul and settle, and be their allies. These Germans had attacked
and conquered the Aeduans, taken from them hostages, and with the
Sequanians were in the ascendency.

In Switzerland lived the HELVETII. They had so increased in numbers
that their country was too small for them. They therefore proposed to
emigrate farther into Gaul, and the Sequanians, whose lands bordered
on those of the Helvetians, gave them permission to march through
their country.

Such was the state of affairs when Caesar arrived in Gaul. Feeling
that the passage of such a large body of emigrants (368,000) through
Gaul would be dangerous to the province (Gallia Narbonensis), he
determined to interfere. The Helvetians were met at BIBRACTE, near
Autun, and after a terrible battle, which raged from noon until night,
were defeated with great slaughter (58). The survivors, about one
third, were treated kindly, and most of them sent back to Switzerland.

Caesar now turned his attention to the Germans who had settled west of
the Rhine. After several fruitless attempts at negotiation, during
which the bad faith of Ariovistus became conspicuous, the forces came
together. Though the Germans were brave, they were no match for the
drilled legionaries, who fought with the regularity of a machine. Few
of the barbarians escaped, but among these was Ariovistus.

The campaigns of this year being ended, the legions were sent into
winter quarters among the Sequanians under Labiénus, the lieutenant of
Caesar. He himself went into Cisalpine Gaul to attend to his duties as
administrator, and to have communication with his friends at Rome.


THE WAR WITH THE BELGAE.

While Caesar was in Hither Gaul, he learned from Labiénus that the
BELGAE were forming a league to resist the Romans. This people
occupied the northeastern part of Gaul, and embraced several tribes,
of which the principal were the REMI, BELLOVACI, SUESSIÓNES, and
NERVII. The last were the fiercest and least civilized.

Caesar raised two new legions, making eight in all, and marched
against the Belgae as soon as the spring opened. His sudden approach
alarmed the Remi, who lived nearest to Central Gaul, and they
immediately put themselves under his protection. From them he learned
that the Belgae could muster about 300,000 men.

By skilful tactics and a successful attack he put to flight and nearly
annihilated the Suessiónes. The Bellovaci now put themselves under his
protection, but the Nervii remained in arms. One day, while the six
legions were forming camp on the bank of the river Sabis, the Nervii
and their allies suddenly rushed upon them from an ambuscade in the
woods on the opposite bank. The troops were entirely unprepared, and
so quick was the enemy's charge that the Romans had not time to put on
their helmets, to remove the covering from their shields, or to find
their proper places in the ranks. Great confusion followed, and they
became almost panic-stricken. Caesar rushed into their midst, snatched
a shield from a soldier, and by his presence and coolness revived
their courage. The Nervii were checked, and victory was assured. But
the enemy fought on with a bravery that excited the admiration of
Caesar. Of sixty thousand men scarcely five hundred survived. The
women and children were cared for kindly by Caesar, and settled in
their own territory.

The Aduatuci, who had assisted the Nervii in their struggle, were
conquered by Caesar and sold into slavery.

Thus ended the Belgian campaign (57). The legions were put into winter
quarters near where the war had been waged, and Caesar went to Italy.
In his honor was decreed a thanksgiving lasting fifteen days.


THE VENETI.--INVASION OF GERMANY.

All the tribes in the northwestern part of Gaul (Brittany) except the
VENETI had given hostages to Crassus, son of the Triumvir, and
lieutenant of Caesar. This tribe refused to give hostages, and,
inducing others to join them, seized some Roman officers sent among
them by Crassus. The campaign of the third year (56) was directed
against these people. They were mostly sailors and fishermen, with
villages built on the end of promontories and easily defended by land.
In a naval engagement, which lasted nearly all day, their whole fleet
was destroyed. The leaders of the Veneti were put to death for their
treachery in seizing Roman officers, and the rest were sold into
slavery.

The legions spent the winter of 56-55 in the northern part of Gaul,
among the Aulerci and neighboring tribes.

During this winter another wave of Germans passed over the Rhine into
Gaul. They had been driven from their homes by a powerful tribe called
the SUEVI. In the spring of 55 Caesar collected his troops and
advanced to within twelve miles of the German camp, and gave the
invaders twenty-four hours to leave the country. Before the expiration
of the time, they attacked Caesar's outposts, killing several Knights,
and two men of aristocratic families. In the general engagement that
followed, the Germans were totally routed and most of them were slain.

Caesar next determined to cross the Rhine into Germany, thinking thus
to inspire the Germans with greater fear of the Romans. He built his
famous bridge, crossed it, remained eighteen days in Germany, and,
thinking his object accomplished, returned to Gaul, destroying the
bridge behind him.


INVASION OF BRITAIN.

It was now August and Caesar occupied the rest of the season by
crossing the Channel to Britain (England). Landing near Deal, with but
little resistance on the part of the natives, he explored the country
for a short time, and returned in September, as the equinox was near
and the weather unsettled. The legions were sent into winter quarters
among the Belgae, and Caesar set out for Cisalpine Gaul.

During this winter (55-54), orders were given to build a large fleet,
as Caesar intended to return to Britain the next year. After all
preparations were completed, he set sail, July 20, 54, and the next
day landed on the island. He defeated the Britons under their leader
CASSIVELAUNUS, and compelled them to pay tribute and give hostages.
Many thousand prisoners were taken, and sold in Italy as slaves.


FINAL STRUGGLES OF THE GAULS.

In the winter of 54-53 the legions were distributed among several
tribes. That stationed in the territory of the Eburónes was commanded
by the lieutenants, Gabínus and Cotta. News reached the encampment
that there was an uprisal of the Eburónes. It was decided to break up
camp, and go, if possible, to the winter quarters of their nearest
companions. On the march they were surprised and nearly all killed.
Only a few stragglers carried the news to Labiénus, who was wintering
with a legion among the Remi.

This success moved the Nervii to attack Quintus Cicero, the lieutenant
who was wintering with his legion among them. Word was sent to Caesar,
who had fortunately not yet left Gaul. He hastened to Cicero's relief,
raised the siege, and all but annihilated the revolting Nervii.

In 53 Caesar punished the Eburónes for their action in the previous
winter. The tribe was completely destroyed, but their leader,
Ambiorix, escaped and was never captured. During this summer Caesar
again crossed the Rhine. At the close of the summer he returned to
Cisalpine Gaul, supposing that the Gauls were totally subdued. He was
mistaken. The patriotism of the people was not yet extinguished. The
chiefs of all the tribes secretly established communication with each
other. A day was settled upon for a general uprising. The Roman
inhabitants of Genabum, on the Liger, were massacred. The leading
spirit in this last struggle of the Gauls was VERCINGETORIX, chief of
the Averni.

Caesar hastened across the Alps, surmounted the difficulties of
crossing the Cevennes when the snow was very deep, collected his
legions, marched upon Genabum, and plundered and burnt the town.

Vercingetorix saw that he was no match for the legions in open battle.
He proposed, therefore, to cut off Caesar's supplies by burning all
the towns of the Bituriges, and laying the country waste. Avaricum
alone was spared. Within its walls were placed the best of their goods
and a strong garrison. Thither Caesar marched, and, after a well
defended siege, captured the town and killed every person in it,
excepting eight hundred, who escaped to the camp of Vercingetorix.
Large quantities of corn were taken, with which Caesar supplied his
soldiers. He then marched against Gergovia, the capital of the Averni.
As the town was on a high plateau, and too strong to be stormed, he
laid siege to it. A part of the army, contrary to instructions, one
day attempted to assault the place. The battle which followed was
disastrous to the Romans, and the only defeat Caesar received in Gaul.
Forty-six officers and seven hundred men fell. The siege was raised.
It was a serious position for Caesar. All Gaul was in flames.
Retreating at once, he formed a junction with Labiénus at Agendicum,
and with all his troops started for Gallia Narbonensis to protect it
from invasion.

On his route was ALESIA. Here Vercingetorix was intrenched with eighty
thousand troops. It was, like Gergovia, situated on a hill and
considered impregnable. Caesar laid siege to this place (52).
Vercingetorix appealed to all Gaul for aid. Hardly had the fortress
been invested when Caesar's army was surrounded by an immense force of
Gauls that had come to the rescue. Caesar needed now all his skill and
genius. But they did not fail him. The relieving army, though five
times as large as his, was driven back and sent flying home.

Seeing that all was over, Vercingetorix called a council of his chiefs
and advised surrender. A message was sent to Caesar. He demanded
unconditional surrender, and was obeyed. The people were sold into
slavery, and the money obtained distributed among the soldiers.
Vercingetorix was kept to be exhibited in the triumph at Rome, and
afterwards died in a dungeon.

With the fall of Alesia, the subjugation of Gaul was practically
completed.

The next year (51) Caesar honored several chiefs with privileges; some
of the nobles were granted the franchise, and some admitted to the
Senate. The work of Romanizing Gaul was fairly begun. Two provinces
were formed, Gallia and Belgica, and later (17 A. D.) the former of
these was subdivided into Lugdunensis and Aquitania. Roman money was
introduced, and Latin became the official language.




CHAPTER XXXI.

CLODIUS AND MILO.--DEATH OF CRASSUS.


During the nine years (59-50) passed by Caesar in Gaul, great
confusion prevailed at Rome. The Republic needed a strong, firm hand,
which would stop the shedding of blood and insure security of person
and property. Pompey had attempted to bring about this result, but had
failed. There were two prominent factions, one led by CLODIUS, the
other by MILO.

"Clodius is the most extraordinary figure in this extraordinary
period. He had no character. He had no distinguished talent save for
speech; he had no policy; he was ready to adopt any cause or person
which for the moment was convenient to him; and yet for five years
this man was the leader of the Roman mob. He could defy justice,
insult the Consuls, beat the Tribunes, parade the streets with a gang
of armed slaves, killing persons disagreeable to him; and in the
Senate itself he had high friends and connections, who threw a shield
over him when his audacity had gone beyond endurance." Milo was as
disreputable as Clodius. His chief fame had been gained in the schools
of the gladiators. Gangs of armed slaves accompanied him everywhere,
and there were constant collisions between his retainers and those of
Clodius.

In 57 Consuls were elected who favored Cicero, and his recall was
demanded. Clodius and his followers opposed the recall. The nobles,
led by their tool Milo, pressed it. Day after day the opposing parties
met in bloody affrays. For seven months the brawl continued, till
Milo's party finally got the ascendancy; the Assembly was convened,
and the recall voted.

For seventeen months Cicero had been in Greece, lamenting his hard
lot. He landed at Brundisium on August 5, 57, and proceeded to Rome.
Outside the city all men of note, except his avowed enemies, were
waiting to receive him. The Senate voted to restore his property, and
to rebuild his palace on the Palatine Hill and his other villas at the
public expense. But Clodius, with his bands of ruffians, interrupted
the workmen engaged in the repair of his Palatine house, broke down
the walls, and, attacking Cicero himself, nearly murdered him.

At last Clodius even attempted to burn the house of Milo. The long
struggle between these two ruffians culminated when Milo was a
candidate for the consulship, and Clodius for the praetorship. The two
meeting by accident in the Via Appia at Bovillae, Clodius was
murdered, 20 January, 52. This act of violence strengthened Pompey,
who was nominated sole Consul. Milo was impeached. His guilt was
evident, and he went into exile at Massilia. Cicero prepared an
elaborate speech in his defence, but did not dare to deliver it.

During the interval between the two campaigns of 57 and 56, Caesar
renewed his alliance with his two colleagues in interviews that were
held at Ravenna and Luca. He retained the command of Gaul; Pompey,
that of Spain; Crassus, that of Syria.

CRASSUS now undertook the war against the Parthians. He was
accompanied by his son, who had done good service under Caesar in
Gaul. They arrived at Zeugma, a city of Syria, on the Euphrátes; and
the Romans, seven legions strong, with four thousand cavalry, drew
themselves up along the river. The Quaestor, CASSIUS, a man of
ability, proposed to Crassus a plan of the campaign, which consisted
in following the river as far as Seleucia, in order not to be
separated from his fleet and provisions, and to avoid being surrounded
by the cavalry of the enemy. But Crassus allowed himself to be
deceived by an Arab chief, who lured him to the sandy plains of
Mesopotamia at Carrhae.

The forces of the Parthians, divided into many bodies, suddenly rushed
upon the Roman ranks, and drove them back. The young Crassus attempted
a charge at the head of fifteen hundred horsemen. The Parthians
yielded, but only to draw him into an ambush, where he perished, after
great deeds of valor. His head, carried on the end of a pike, was
borne before the eyes of his unhappy father, who, crushed by grief and
despair, gave the command into the hands of Cassius. Cassius gave
orders for a general retreat. The Parthians subjected the Roman army
to continual losses, and Crassus himself was killed in a conference
(53).

In this disastrous campaign there perished more than twenty thousand
Romans. Ten thousand were taken prisoners and compelled to serve as
slaves in the army of the Parthians.

The death of Crassus broke the Triumvirate; that of Julia, in 54, had
sundered the family ties between Caesar and Pompey, who married
Cornelia, the widow of the young Crassus, and daughter of Metellus
Scipio.




CHAPTER XXXII.

CAESAR'S STRUGGLE WITH POMPEY.--BATTLE OF PHARSALIA.


Pompey was elected sole Consul in February, 52. He at once threw off
all pretence of an alliance with Caesar, and devoted himself to the
interests of the Senate and aristocracy.

The brilliant successes of Caesar in Gaul had made a profound
impression upon the minds of the citizens, to whom the name of the
northern barbarians was still fraught with terror. Caesar had won for
himself distinction as a soldier greater than the Scipios, or Sulla,
or Pompey. "He was coming back to lay at his country's feet a province
larger than Spain, not only subdued, but reconciled to subjugation; a
nation of warriors, as much devoted to him as his own legions." The
nobility had watched his successes with bitter envy; but they were
forced to vote a thanksgiving of twenty days, which "the people made
sixty."

Caesar now declared through his followers at Rome that he desired a
second consulship. But he wished first to celebrate his triumph, and
on this account would not disband his army; for, according to the
custom, he could not triumph without it. According to another custom,
however, he must disband it before he could offer himself as a
candidate for the consulship. But he asked permission to set aside
this custom, and to become a candidate while he was in the province in
command of the army.

The law requiring a candidate to give up his command had been
suspended several times before this; so that Caesar's request was
reasonable. His enemies in the city were numerous and powerful, and he
felt that, if he returned as a private citizen, his personal safety
would be in danger; whereas, if he were a magistrate, his person would
be considered sacred.

The Senate, on the other hand, felt that, if he carried his point, the
days of their influence were numbered. Their first step, therefore,
was to weaken Caesar, and to provide their champion, Pompey, with a
force in Italy, They voted that Caesar should return to Pompey a
legion which had been loaned him, and also should send another legion
back to Italy. The vote was taken on the ostensible plea that the
troops were needed in Asia Minor against the Parthians; but when they
reached Italy they were placed under Pompey's command in Campania. The
Consuls chosen for the year 49 were both bitter enemies of Caesar. He
had taken up his winter quarters at Ravenna, the last town in his
province bordering on Italy. From here he sent a messenger with
letters to the Senate, stating that he was ready to resign his
command, if Pompey did the same. The messenger arrived at Rome,
January 1, 49, on the day in which the new Consuls entered upon their
duties.

The letters were read in the Senate, and there followed a spirited
discussion, resulting in a decree that Caesar should resign his
command. The Tribunes opposed; but, being threatened by the Consuls,
they were compelled to leave the city, and went directly to Ravenna.

When the action of the Senate was reported to Caesar, he called
together his soldiers, and addressed them thus: "For nine years I and
my army have served our country loyally and with some degree of
success. We have driven the Germans across the Rhine; we have made
Gaul a province; and the Senate, for answer, has broken the
constitution in setting aside the Tribunes who spoke in my defence. It
has voted the state in danger, and has called Italy to arms, when no
single act of mine can justify it in this course." The soldiers became
enthusiastic, and were eager to follow their leader without pay.
Contributions were offered him by both men and officers. LABIENUS, his
trusted lieutenant, alone proved false. He stole away, and joined
Pompey. Caesar then sent for two legions from across the Alps. With
these legions he crossed the RUBICON into Italy, and marched to
Ariminum.

Meanwhile the report of his movements reached Rome. The aristocracy
had imagined that his courage would fail him, or that his army would
desert. Thoroughly frightened, Consuls, Praetors, Senators,-leaving
wives, children, and property to their fate,-fled from the city to
seek safety with Pompey in Capua. They did not stop even to take the
money from the treasury, but left it locked.

Caesar paused at Ariminum, and sent envoys to the Senate, stating that
he was still desirous of peace. If Pompey would depart to his province
in Spain, he would himself disband his own troops. He was even willing
to have a personal interview with Pompey. This message was received by
the Senate after its flight from Rome. The substance of its reply was,
that Pompey did not wish a personal interview, but would go to Spain,
and that Caesar must leave Ariminum, return to his province, and give
security that he would dismiss his army.

These terms seemed to Caesar unfair, and he would not accept them.
Accordingly he sent his lieutenant, Mark Antony, across the mountains
to Arretium, on the road to Rome. He himself pushed on to Ancóna,
before Pompey could stop him. The towns that were on his march threw
open their gates, their garrisons joined his army, and their officers
fled. Steadily he advanced, with constantly increasing forces, until
when he reached Corfinium his army had swelled to thirty thousand
troops.

This place had been occupied by Domitius with a party of aristocrats
and a few thousand men. Caesar surrounded the town, and when Domitius
endeavored to steal away, his own troops took him and delivered him
over to Caesar. The capture of Corfinium and the desertion of its
garrison filled Pompey and his followers with dismay. They hurried to
Brundisium, where ships were in readiness for them to depart.

Hoping to intercept Pompey, Caesar hastened to this port. On his
arrival outside of the town, the Consuls, with half the army, had
already gone. Pompey, however, was still within the place, with twelve
thousand troops, waiting for transports to carry them away. He refused
to see Caesar; and, though the latter endeavored to blockade the port,
he was unsuccessful, owing to want of ships.

Thus Pompey escaped. With him were the Consuls, more than half the
Senate, and the aristocracy. Caesar would have followed them, but a
fleet must first be obtained, and matters nearer home demanded his
attention.

In sixty days Caesar had made himself master of Italy. On his way to
Rome he met Cicero, and invited him to attend the Senate, but he
preferred to stay away. Caesar entered the city unattended, and
assembled the Senate through the Tribunes, Mark Antony and Cassius
Longínus. The attendance was small, as most of the members were with
Pompey. In his address to the Senate Caesar spoke of his own
forbearance and concessions, of their unjust demands, and their
violent suppression of the authority of the Tribunes. He was still
willing to send envoys to treat with Pompey, but no one was found
willing to go. After three days spent in useless discussion, Caesar
decided to act for himself. By his own edict, he restored the children
of the victims of Sulla's proscription to their rights and property.
The money in the treasury was voted him by the Assembly of the people.
He took as much of it as he needed, and started at once for Gaul to
join his troops on his way to Spain.

He had much to accomplish. Spain was in the hands of Pompey's
lieutenants, Afranius, Petreius, and Varro, who had six legions and
allied troops. From Sicily and Sardinia came most of the grain
supplies of Rome, and it was important to hold these islands. To
Sicily he sent Curio and to Sardinia Valerius. Cato, who was in charge
of Sicily, immediately abandoned it and fled to Africa. Sardinia
received Caesar's troops with open arms.

Upon his arrival in Gaul, Caesar found that the inhabitants of
Massilia had risen against his authority, led by the same Domitius
whom he had sent away unharmed from Corfinium. Caesar blockaded the
city, and, leaving Decimus Brutus in charge of operations, continued
his journey to Spain. He found Afranius and Petreius strongly
intrenched at ILERDA in Catalonia (Northern Spain). Within forty days
he brought them to terms, and Varro, who was in Southern Spain, was
eager to surrender. All Spain was at his feet.

Before leaving Spain, Caesar summoned the leading Spaniards and Romans
to Cordova, for a conference. All promised obedience to his authority.
He then set sail from Gades to Tarragóna, where he joined his legions
and marched back to Massilia, which he found hard pressed and ready to
surrender. The gates were opened. All were pardoned, and Domitius was
allowed to escape a second time.

Caesar left a portion of his forces in Gaul, and with the rest arrived
at Rome in the early winter of 49-48. Thus far he had been successful.
Gaul, Spain, Sardinia, Sicily, and Italy were his. He had not
succeeded, however, in getting together a naval force in the Adriatic,
and he had lost his promising lieutenant, Curio, who had been
surprised and killed in Africa, whither he had gone in pursuit of Cato
and Pompey's followers.

During Caesar's absence, affairs at Rome had resumed their usual
course. He had left the city under charge of his lieutenant, Aemilius
Lepidus, and Italy in command of Mark Antony. Caesar was still at
Massilia, when he learned that the people of Rome had proclaimed him
Dictator. Financial troubles in the city had made this step necessary.
Public credit was shaken. Debts had not been paid since the civil war
began. Caesar allowed himself only eleven days in Rome. In this time
estimates were drawn of all debts as they were one year before, the
interest was remitted and the principal declared still due. This
measure relieved the debtors somewhat.

It was now nearly a year since Caesar crossed the Rubicon. Pompey,
during the nine months that had elapsed since his escape from
Brundisium, had been collecting his forces in Epírus. Here had
gathered many princes from the East, a majority of the Senatorial
families of Rome, Cato and Cicero, the vanquished Afranius, and the
renegade Labiénus. There were nine full legions, with cavalry and
auxiliaries, amounting in all to 100,000 men.

Caesar reached Brundisium at the end of the year 49. His forces were
fewer in number than those of his adversary, amounting to not more
than 15,000 infantry and 600 cavalry. But his legionaries were all
veterans, inured to toil and hunger, to heat and cold, and every man
was devoted to his leader.

On the 4th of January he set sail from Brundisium, landing after an
uneventful voyage at Acroceraunia. He advanced at once towards
Dyrrachium where were Pompey's head-quarters, occupied Apollonia, and
intrenched himself on the left bank of the river Apsus. The country
was well disposed and furnished him with ample supplies.

Caesar sent back the vessels on which he crossed to transport his
remaining troops, but they were intercepted on their way across and
many of them destroyed. He was therefore compelled to confine himself
to trifling operations, until his lieutenant, Mark Antony, could fit
out a second fleet and bring over the remainder of his legions. When
Antony finally crossed, he landed one hundred miles up the coast.
Pompey's forces were between him and Caesar, and his position was full
of danger; but Caesar marched rapidly round Dyrrachium, and joined him
before Pompey knew of his movements.

The great general was now ready for action. He built a line of
strongly fortified forts around Pompey's camp, blockading him by land.
He turned the streams of water aside, causing as much inconvenience as
possible to the enemy. So the siege dragged on into June.

Two deserters informed Pompey of a weak spot in Caesar's line. At this
point Pompey made a sudden attack. For once Caesar's troops were
surprised and panic-stricken. Even his own presence did not cause them
to rally. Nearly one thousand of his men fell, thirty-two standards,
and a few hundred soldiers were captured.

This victory was the ruin of Pompey's cause. Its importance was
exaggerated. His followers were sure that the war was practically
over; and so certain were they of ultimate success that they neglected
to follow up the advantage gained, and gave Caesar opportunity to
recover from the blow.

The latter now retired from the sea-board into Thessaly. Pompey
followed, confident of victory. The nobles in his camp amused
themselves with quarrelling about the expected spoils of war. Cato and
Cicero remained behind in Epirus, the former disgusted at the actions
of the degenerate nobility, the latter pleading ill health.

The two armies encamped on a plain in Thessaly near the river Enipeus,
only four miles apart. Between them lay a low hill called PHARSÁLUS,
which gave name to the battle which followed.

"The battle of PHARSALIA (August 9, 48) has acquired a special place
in history, because it was fought by the Roman aristocracy in their
own persons in defence of their own supremacy. Senators and the sons
of Senators, the heirs of the names and fortunes of the ancient Roman
families, the leaders of society in Roman salons, and the chiefs of
the political party of the optimates (aristocracy) were here present
on the field. The other great actions were fought by the ignoble
multitude whose deaths were of less significance. The plains of
Pharsalia were watered by the precious blood of the elect of the
earth."

For several days the armies watched each other without decisive
action. One morning towards the end of May (August 9, old style)
Caesar noticed a movement in Pompey's lines that told him the expected
attack was coming.

The position of the Senatorial army was well taken. Its right wing
rested on the Enipeus, its left was spread out on the plain. Pompey
himself commanded the left with the two legions the Senate had taken
from Caesar. Outside him on the plain were his allies covered by the
cavalry. Opposite Pompey was Caesar, with the famous Tenth Legion. His
left and centre were led by his faithful Tribunes, Mark Antony and
Cassius Longínus.

At the given signal Caesar's front ranks advanced on a run, threw
their darts, drew their swords, and closed in. At once Pompey's
cavalry charged, outflanking the enemy's right wing, and driving back
the opposing cavalry, who were inferior in numbers. But as they
advanced flushed with victory, Caesar's fourth line, which he had held
in reserve, and which was made up of the flower of his legions,
appeared in their way. So fierce was their attack that the Pompeians
wavered, turned, and fled. They never rallied. The fourth line threw
themselves upon Pompey's left wing, which was now unprotected. This
wing, composed of Caesar's old veterans, was probably in no mood to
fight its former comrades in arms. At any rate, it turned and fled.
Pompey himself mounted his horse and rode off in despair. Thus the
battle ended in a rout. But two hundred of Caesar's men fell, while
fifteen thousand of the enemy lay dead on the field.

The abandoned camp was a remarkable sight. The luxurious patricians
had built houses of turf with ivy trained over the entrances to
protect their delicate skins from the sun's rays; couches were
stretched out ready for them to take repose after their expected
victory, and tables were spread with dainty food and wines on which to
feast. As he saw these preparations Caesar exclaimed, "These are the
men who accused my suffering, patient army, which needed the common
necessaries of life, of dissoluteness and profligacy." But Caesar
could not delay. Leaving a portion of his forces in camp, by rapid
marching he cut off the retreat of the enemy. Twenty-four thousand
surrendered, all of whom were pardoned. Domitius, whom we saw at
Corfinium and Massilia, was killed trying to escape. Labiénus,
Afranius, and Petreius managed to steal away by night. Thus ended the
battle of Pharsalia.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

CAESAR'S OPERATIONS IN EGYPT, ASIA, AFRICA, AND SPAIN.


Pompey, in his flight from Pharsalia, hastened by the shortest way to
the sea, and, seeing a vessel weighing anchor, embarked with a few
companions who had accompanied him in his flight. He went to Mityléne,
and from there to Egypt, hoping to obtain an asylum with the young
PTOLEMY; but he was seized upon his arrival, and beheaded, 28
September, 48.

Just before his death Pompey had completed his fifty-eighth year.
"Though he had some great and good qualities, he hardly deserved the
surname of GREAT. He was certainly a good soldier, and is said to have
excelled in all athletic sports, but he fell short of being a first-
class general. He won great successes in Spain, and more especially in
the East; but for these he was, no doubt, partly indebted to what
others had already done. Of the gifts which make a good statesman, he
had really none. He was too weak and irresolute to choose a side and
stand by it. Pitted against such a man as Caesar, he could not but
fail. But to his credit be it said, that in a corrupt time he never
used his opportunities for plunder and extortion."

Meanwhile Caesar, pursuing his victory with indefatigable activity,
set sail for Egypt. Upon his arrival the head of his enemy was brought
to him. He turned from the sight with tears in his eyes. The murderers
now saw what would be their fate. Ptolemy was at variance with his
sister, the famous CLEOPÁTRA, Caesar sided with her. The inhabitants
of Alexandría revolted, and besieged Caesar in the palace; but with a
handful of soldiers he bravely baffled their attacks. Setting fire to
the neighboring buildings, he escaped to his ships. Afterwards he
returned and wreaked vengeance upon the Alexandrians, establishing
CLEOPÁTRA upon the throne (47).

Satisfied with this vengeance, Caesar left Egypt, and went to Pontus,
where PHARNACES, son of Mithradátes, was inciting a revolt against
Rome. Caesar attacked and defeated him at ZELA (47), with a rapidity
rendered proverbial by his words, _Veni, vidi, vici_, I CAME, I
SAW, I CONQUERED.

He now passed quickly down the Hellespont, and had landed in Italy
before it was known that he had left Pontus. During his absence from
the capital there had been some minor disturbances; but the mass of
the citizens were firmly attached to him. Few could distrust the
genius and fortune of the irresistible conqueror. In October of 48 he
had been made Dictator a second time, and appointed Tribune for life.

Caesar's return in September, 47, was marked by no proscription. He
insisted that all debts should be paid, and the rights of property
respected. He restored quiet, and after a brief stay of three months
prepared to transport his army to Africa. The army was in Campania,
but discontented and mutinous because of not receiving the expected
privilege of pillage and plunder. They refused to move until certain
promised rewards were received. The Tenth Legion broke out into open
revolt, and marched from Campania to Rome to obtain their rights.
Caesar collected them in the Campus Martins, and asked them to state
their grievances. They demanded their discharge. "I grant it,
citizens" (_Quirites_), said the Imperator. Heretofore he had
always addressed them as "fellow soldiers," and the implied rebuke was
so keen, that a reaction at once began, and they all begged to be
received again into his service. He accepted them, telling them that
lands had been allotted to each soldier out of the _ager
publicus_, or out of his own estates.

Africa must now be subdued. Since the defeat and death of Curio, King
JUBA had found no one to dispute his authority. Around him now rallied
all the followers of Pompey, Metellus Scipio, Cato, Labiénus,
Afranius, Petreius, and the slain general's two sons, Sextus and
Gnaeus Pompeius.

Utica was made their head-quarters. Here Cato collected thirteen
legions of troops of miscellaneous character. Raids were made upon
Sicily, Sardinia, and the coasts of Italy. Caesar's officers, if
captured, were put to death without mercy.

Cicero alone of the old Pompeian party protested against such
cruelties. He remained in Italy, was denounced by them as a traitor,
and charged with currying favor of the Dictator.

Caesar sailed from Lilybaeum (December 19), effected a landing near
Leptis, and maintained himself in a fortified position until he formed
useful alliances among the Mauretanians. Many Roman residents in the
province came to him, indignant at Metellus Scipio's promise to Juba
to give the province to him in case of success. Many deserters also
came in, enraged that precedence was given to Juba over Scipio in
councils of war. But the enemy's army was kept full of new recruits
sent from Utica by Cato.

For three months Caesar failed to bring on the desired engagement;
Scipio had learned caution from Pompey's experience at Pharsalia.
Finally, at THAPSUS, one hundred miles southeast of Carthage, April 4,
46, the armies met. Caesar's men were so enthusiastic that they rushed
to the charge with one impulse. There was no real battle, but rather a
slaughter. Officers and men fled for their lives. Scipio was
intercepted in his flight and slain. Juba and Petreius fled together,
but, finding their retreat cut off, engaged, it is said, in mortal
combat; when the first, Petreius, fell, the other threw himself on his
own sword. Labiénus and the two sons of Pompey managed to escape to
Spain. Afranius was captured and executed.

Cato, when he heard of the defeat, retired to his chamber in Utica,
and committed suicide.

Thus ended the African campaign.

On his return from Africa, Caesar celebrated four triumphs, on four
successive days; one over the Gauls, one over Ptolemy of Egypt, one
over Pharnaces, and one over Juba. He gratified his armed followers
with liberal gifts, and pleased the people by his great munificence.
They were feasted at a splendid banquet, at which were twenty-two
thousand tables, each table having three couches, and each couch three
persons. Then followed shows in the circus and theatre, combats of
wild beasts and gladiators, in which the public especially delighted.

Honors were now heaped upon Caesar without stint. A thanksgiving of
forty days was decreed. His statue was placed in the Capitol. Another
was inscribed to Caesar the Demigod. A golden chair was allotted to
him in the Senate-House. The name of the fifth month (_Quintilis_)
of the Roman calendar was changed to JULIUS (July). He was
appointed Dictator for two years, and later for life. He received for
three years the office of Censor, which enabled him to appoint
Senators, and to be guardian of manners and morals. He had
already been made Tribune (48) for life, and Pontifex Maximus (63). In
a word, he was king in everything excepting name.

Caesar's most remarkable and durable reform at this period was the
REVISION OF THE CALENDAR. The Roman method of reckoning time had been
so inaccurate, that now their seasons were more than two months
behind. Caesar established a calendar, which, with slight changes, is
still in use. It went into operation January 1st, 45. He employed
Sosigenes, an Alexandrian astronomer, to superintend the reform.

While Sosigenes was at work on the calendar, Caesar purified the
Senate. Many who were guilty of extortion and corruption were
expelled, and the vacancies filled with persons of merit.

Meanwhile matters in Spain were not satisfactory. After the battle of
Pharsalia, Cassius Longinus, Trebonius, and Marcus Aemilius Lepidus
had been sent to govern the province. They could not agree. The
soldiers became mutinous. To Spain flocked all who were dissatisfied
with Roman affairs. The remnant of Scipio's African army rested there
in its wanderings. Thus Labiénus and Pompey's two sons managed to
collect an army as numerous as that which had been defeated at
Thapsus. There were thirteen legions in all.

Caesar saw that he must make one more struggle. He set out for the
province accompanied by his nephew OCTAVIUS (afterwards the Emperor
AUGUSTUS), and by his trusted friend and officer, DECIMUS BRUTUS. The
struggle in Spain was protracted for several months, but the decisive
battle was fought at MUNDA, 17 March, 45, on the Guadalquivir, near
Cordova. The forces were well matched. The advantage in position was
on the side of the enemy. The battle was stubbornly fought, most of it
hand to hand, with short swords. So equal was the struggle, so
doubtful at one time the issue, that Caesar himself sprang from his
horse, seized a standard, and rallied a wavering legion. Finally,
Labiénus was seen to gallop across the field. It was thought he was
fleeing. Panic seized his troops, they broke and ran. Thirty thousand
were slain, including three thousand Roman Knights, and Labiénus
himself.

Gnaeus Pompey shortly after lost his life, but Sextus lived for a
number of years.

Caesar tarried in Spain, regulating affairs, until late in the autumn,
when he returned to Rome and enjoyed another triumph over the Iberians
(Spaniards). The triumph was followed, as usual, by games and
festivals, which kept the populace in a fever of delight and
admiration.


CATO.-METELLUS SCIPIO.

MARCUS PORTIUS CATO UTICENSIS [Footnote: Cato the Younger, called
UTICENSIS on account of his death at Utica.] (95-46) was the great-
grandson of Cato the Censor. He was the last of the Romans of the old
school. Like his more famous ancestor, he was frugal and austere in
his habits, upright, unselfish, and incorruptible. But he was a
fanatic, who could not be persuaded to relinquish his views on any
subject. As a general, he was a failure, having neither taste nor
genius for military exploits. He held various offices at Rome, as
Quaestor and Praetor; but when candidate for the consulship he was
defeated, because he declined to win votes by bribery and other
questionable methods then in vogue.

QUINTUS CAECILIUS METELLUS PIUS belonged to the illustrious family of
the Scipios by birth, and to that of the Metelli by adoption. He was
one of the most unjust and dishonest of the Senators that opposed
Caesar. He was the father-in-law of Pompey, by whom he was made a
pliant tool against the great conqueror.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

MURDER OF CAESAR.


Upon his return from Spain, Caesar granted pardon to all who had
fought against him, the most prominent of whom were GAIUS CASSIUS,
MARCUS BRUTUS, and CICERO. He increased the number of the Senate to
nine hundred. He cut off the corn grants, which nursed the city mob in
idleness. He sent out impoverished men to colonize old cities. He
rebuilt Corinth, and settled eighty thousand Italians on the site of
Carthage. As a censor of morals he was very rigid. His own habits were
marked by frugality. The rich young patricians were forbidden to be
carried about in litters, as had been the custom. Libraries were
formed. Eminent physicians and scientists were encouraged to settle in
Rome. The harbor of Ostia was improved, and a road constructed from
the Adriatic to the Tyrrhenian Sea, over the Apennines. A temple to
Mars was built, and an immense amphitheatre was erected at the foot of
the Tarpeian Rock.

In the midst of this useful activity he was basely murdered.

CASSIUS LONGINUS and MARCUS JUNIUS BRUTUS were the leaders in the
conspiracy to effect Caesar's death, Cassius, a former lieutenant of
Crassus, had shown great bravery in the war with the Parthians. At
Pharsalia he fought on the side of Pompey, but was afterwards pardoned
by Caesar. He was married to a sister of Brutus. The latter, a nephew
and son-in-law of Cato, had also fought at Pharsalia against Caesar,
and also been pardoned by him. Cassius, it was said, hated the tyrant,
and Brutus tyranny.

These conspirators were soon joined by persons of all parties; and men
who had fought against each other in the civil war now joined hands.
Cicero was not taken into the plot. He was of advanced years, and all
who knew him must have felt that he would never consent to the taking
the life of one who had been so lenient towards his conquered enemies.

On the morning of the IDES (15th) OF MARCH, 44, as Caesar entered the
Senate and took his seat, he was approached by the conspirators,
headed by Tullius Cimber, who prayed for the pardon of his exiled
brother; and while the rest joined him in the request, he, grasping
Caesar's hand, kissed his head and breast. As Caesar attempted to
rise, Cimber dragged his cloak from his shoulders, and Casca, who was
standing behind his chair, stabbed him in the neck. The first blow was
struck, and the whole pack fell upon their noble victim. Cassius
stabbed him in the face, and Marcus Brutus in the groin. He made no
further resistance; but, wrapping his gown over his head and the lower
part of his body, he fell at the base of POMPEY'S STATUE, which was
drenched with the martyr's blood.

Great tumult and commotion followed; and, in their alarm, most of the
Senators fled. It was two days before the Senate met, the conspirators
meanwhile having taken refuge in the Capitol. Public sentiment was
against them. Many of Caesar's old soldiers were in the city, and many
more were flocking there from all directions. The funeral oration of
Mark Antony over the remains produced a deep impression upon the
crowd. They became so excited when the speaker removed the dead man's
toga, and disclosed his wounds, that, instead of allowing the body to
be carried to the Campus Martius for burial, they raised a funeral
pile in the Forum, and there burned it. The crowd then dispersed in
troops, broke into and destroyed the houses of the conspirators.
Brutus and Cassius fled from the city for their lives, followed by the
other murderers.

 As a general Caesar was probably superior to all others, excepting
possibly Hannibal. He was especially remarkable for the fertility of
his resources. It has been said that Napoleon taught his enemies how
to conquer him; but Caesar's enemies never learned how to conquer him,
because he had not a mere system of tactics, but a new stratagem for
every emergency. He was, however, not only a great general, but a pre-
eminent statesman, and second only to Cicero in eloquence. As a
historian, he wrote in a style that was clear, vigorous, and also
simple. Most of his writings are lost; but of those that remain Cicero
said that fools might try to improve on them, but no wise man would
attempt it.




CHAPTER XXXV.

THE SECOND TRIUMVIRATE.--PHILIPPI AND ACTIUM.


Caesar in his will had appointed GAIUS OCTAVIUS, the grandson of his
sister Julia, heir to three fourths of his property; and his other
relatives were to have the remaining fourth.

Young Octavius was in his nineteenth year when Caesar was murdered. He
went at once to Rome to claim his inheritance. Caesar's widow,
Calpurnia, had intrusted to Mark Antony all the money in the house,--a
large sum,--and had also delivered to his care all the Dictator's
writings and memoranda.

Octavius was cool and sagacious, without passion or affection, and
showed himself a match for all his opponents. His arrival at Rome was
disagreeable to Antony, who was unwilling to surrender Caesar's
property. He claimed that he had already expended it for public
purposes. Octavius at once paid the dead Dictator's legacies, mostly
out of his own fortune, thus making himself very popular among the
people. He then joined the party of the Senate, and during the autumn
and winter of 44 was its chief champion. He was helped by the eloquent
Cicero, who was delivering against Antony his famous fourteen
PHILIPPICS,--so called from their resemblance to the great orations of
Demosthenes against Philip.

During the spring of 43 Octavius advanced against Antony, who was at
Mutina (Modena), and defeated him in two battles. He was then
appointed Consul, and, finding it for his interest, he deserted the
Senate, made friends with Antony, and with him and Lepidus formed (27
November, 43) the SECOND TRIUMVIRATE, assuming full authority to
govern and reorganize the state, and to hold office for five years.

The provinces were divided as follows: Lepidus was to have Spain and
Gallia Narbonensis; Antony, the rest of Gaul beyond the Alps and
Gallia Cisalpína; Octavius, Sicily, Sardinia, and Africa. A bloody
prescription followed. Among its victims were CICERO, who was
surrendered to please Antony, 300 Senators, and 2,000 Equites.


PHILIPPI AND ACTIUM.

The Triumvirs could now concentrate their energies upon the East,
whither BRUTUS and CASSIUS, the murderers of Caesar, had fled. These
two had organized in the provinces of the East an army amounting to
80,000 infantry and 20,000 cavalry. They were employed in plundering
various towns of Asia Minor, and finally, in the spring of 42,
assembled their forces at Sardis preparatory to an invasion of Europe.
After marching through Thrace they entered Macedonia, and found Antony
and Octavius opposed to them at PHILIPPI, with an army of 120,000
troops. There were two battles at Philippi in November, 42. In the
first, Brutus defeated Octavius; but Cassius was defeated by Antony,
and, unaware of his colleague's victory, committed suicide. In the
second battle, three weeks later, Brutus was defeated by the united
armies of the Triumvirs, and, following the example of Cassius, put an
end to his life. With Brutus fell the Republic. The absolute
ascendency of individuals, which is monarchy, was then established.

The immediate result of Philippi was a fresh arrangement of the Roman
world among the Triumvirs. Antony preferred the East, Octavius took
Italy and Spain, and Africa fell to Lepidus.

Octavius tried to establish order in Italy, but many obstacles were to
be overcome. Sextus Pompeius, who had escaped from Munda, was in
command of a strong naval force. He controlled a large part of the
Mediterranean, and, by waylaying the corn ships bound for Rome,
exposed the city to great danger from famine. Octavius was obliged to
raise a fleet and meet this danger. At first he was defeated by
Pompey, but later, in 36, in the great sea fight off NAULOCHUS in
Sicily, the rebel was overcome. He fled to Asia with a few followers,
but was taken prisoner at Milétus by one of the lieutenants of Antony,
and put to death.

Lepidus now claimed Sicily as a part of his province, and an equal
share in the government of the Roman world with the other Triumvirs.
But his soldiers were induced to desert him, and he was obliged to
surrender to Octavius. His life was spared, but he was deprived of his
power and provinces. He lived twenty years longer (until 13), but
ceased to be a factor in public affairs. Having rid themselves of all
rivals, Octavius and Antony redivided the Empire, the former taking
the West, the latter the East.

Antony now repaired to Alexandría, and surrendered himself to the
fascinations of the famous Cleopátra. He assumed the habits and dress
of an Eastern monarch, and by his senseless follies disgusted his
friends and supporters. He resigned himself to luxury and idleness,
and finally divorced himself from his wife Octavia, sister of
Octavius, disregarding his good name and the wishes of his friends.
Thus gradually he became more and more estranged from Octavius, until
finally the rupture resulted in open war.

The contest was decided by the naval battle off Cape Actium, in
Greece, September 2, 31. Antony had collected from all parts of the
East a large army, in addition to his fleet, which was supported by
that of Cleopátra. He wished to decide the contest on land; but
Cleopátra insisted that they should fight by sea. The fleet of
Octavius was commanded by Agrippa, who had been in command at the sea-
fight off Naulochus. The battle lasted a long time, and was still
undecided, when Cleopátra hoisted sail and with her sixty vessels
hastened to leave the line. Antony at once followed her. The battle,
however, continued until his remaining fleet was destroyed, and his
army, after a few days' hesitation, surrendered.

Octavius did not follow Antony for about a year. He passed the winter
in Samos, sending Agrippa to Italy with the veterans. His time was
occupied in restoring order in Greece and Asia, in raising money to
satisfy the demands of his troops, and in founding new colonies. At
length he turned his attention to Egypt. After capturing Pelusium, the
key of the country, he marched upon Alexandría. Antony, despairing of
success, committed suicide, expiring in the arms of Cleopátra. The
queen, disdaining to adorn the triumph of the conqueror, followed his
example, and was found dead on her couch, in royal attire, with her
two faithful attendants also dead at her feet.

Octavius was now sole ruler of Rome. Before returning to the capital
to celebrate his triumphs, he organized Egypt as a province, settled
disputes in Judaea, and arranged matters in Syria and Asia Minor. He
arrived at Rome (August 29), and enjoyed three magnificent triumphs.
The gates of the temple of JANUS--which were open in time of war, and
had been closed but twice before, once during Numa's reign, and once
between the First and Second Punic Wars--were closed, and Rome was at
peace with all the world.


MARCUS TULLIUS CICERO.

CICERO'S public life covered a period of nearly forty years, from the
dictatorship of Sulla to the fall of the Republic. Although endowed by
nature with great talents, he was always under the sway of the moment,
and therefore little qualified to be a statesman; yet he had not
sufficient self-knowledge to see it. Hence the attempts he made to
play a part in politics served only to lay bare his utter weakness.
Thus it happened that he was used and then pushed aside, attracted and
repelled, deceived by the weakness of his friends and the strength of
his adversaries; and at last threatened by both the parties between
which he tried to steer his course.




CHAPTER XXXVI.

AUGUSTUS (30 B.C.-14 A.D.)


After enjoying his triple triumph, Octavius should, according to the
precedents of the Republic, have given up the title of IMPERATOR; but
he allowed the Senate, which was only too glad to flatter him, to give
him that name for ten years,--a period which was repeatedly renewed.
In this way he became permanent commander of the national forces. Next
the Imperator (Emperor) caused himself to be invested with the
authority of Censor. This enabled him to revise the list of Senators,
and to restore to this body something of its ancient respectability.
By judicious pruning he reduced the number to six hundred, and
required a property qualification for membership. He placed himself at
its head as PRINCEPS (prince), a title which implied that the Emperor
was the _first_ citizen, without claiming any rights of royalty,
thus lulling any suspicions of the populace.

The Senate still decided the most important questions. It had
jurisdiction in criminal matters, and the right of ratifying new laws.
It was convened three times each month; viz. on the 1st, 5th (or 7th),
and 13th (or 15th). The Emperor voted with the other Senators.

The Senate next conferred upon Octavius the title of AUGUSTUS; then it
made him Proconsul (an officer with the right to govern provinces),
and Consul, with the privilege of having twelve lictors, and of
sitting in the curule chair between the two Consuls. The regular
Consuls, of course, were only too ready to follow his wishes. Finally,
he was made Pontifex Maximus, the head of the Roman religion.

Augustus was now supreme ruler in fact, if not in name. The Senate was
practically subject to his will. The Assemblies gradually lost all
voice in the government, and finally disappeared entirely. The Senate,
however, continued nominally to act until the time of Diocletian (284
A. D.).

As Augustus had exclusive command of the armies, he chose to govern as
Proconsul those provinces which required military forces. He himself
resided at the capital, and sent deputies (_legati_) to oversee
them. The other provinces, called Senatorial, were governed by
Proconsuls appointed by the Senate. These were at this time Sicily,
Africa, Achaia (Greece), Macedonia, Asia (Minor), Hispania Ulterior,
and Gallia Narbonensis.

The city government now included all Italy. In this Augustus was
assisted by three _Praefects_; one in charge of the corn supplies,
a second in charge of the city proper, and a third in charge of his body
guard of nine thousand men, called the PRAETORIAN GUARD. These
Praefects soon overshadowed all the regular magistrates, and through
them Augustus reigned supreme.

The Roman Empire at this time included all the countries bordering on
the Mediterranean, extending east to the Parthian kingdom (the Upper
Euphrátes) and the Arabian Desert, south to the Desert of Sahara, and
west to the Atlantic Ocean. On the north the boundary was unsettled,
and subject to inroads of barbarians. In the early part of his reign
Augustus joined to the Empire a new province, Moesia, comprising the
territory along the Lower Danube, and making nineteen in all.

Augustus next devoted himself to the task of conquering the territory
between the Lower Rhine and Moesia, which was occupied by hardy
mountaineers whose resistance was likely to be stubborn. His two step-
sons, Drusus and Tiberius, were in charge of this important work. They
were so successful as to acquire enough territory to form two new
provinces, Rhaetia and Noricum (15 B.C.).

Tiberius also conquered the valley of the Save, and made it the
province of Pannonia (Western Hungary), 10 B.C.

Drusus, while his brother Tiberius was engaged in Pannonia, made a
campaign against the Germans near the Rhine. He had nearly finished
the conquest of Germany from the Rhine to the Elbe, when he died (9,
B.C.), and was succeeded by his brother Tiberius, who completed his
work.

Drusus received the cognomen of Germanicus for his conquests in
Germany. His wife was Antonia, daughter of Mark Antony, by whom he had
two sons, Germanicus and Claudius, the latter of whom was afterwards
Emperor.

In 7 A.D. Lucius Varus was appointed governor of the newly acquired
territory in Germany. When he endeavored to subject these recently
conquered peoples to the forms of the Roman provincial government,
they rose in rebellion under the lead of Arminius (Herman), a powerful
chief.

Varus was allured from his fortified camp (9 A.D.) into a pass in the
Teutoberger Forests, where he was suddenly attacked on all sides.
After three days' fighting, he succeeded with great loss in making his
way through the pass into the open plain, but was there met by the
enemy in full force, and his troops were annihilated. In despair Varus
killed himself. Germany was practically lost and the Rhine became
again the Roman frontier. This defeat caused a great stir at Rome, and
the Emperor is said to have exclaimed in his sorrow, "Varus, Varus,
give me back my legions!"

Five years later (14 A.D.) Augustus died. In his last moments he
asked his friends if he had not played well his part in the comedy of
life.

Although married three times, the Emperor had but one child, JULIA (39
B.C.--14 A.D.), by his second wife, Scribonia. She was noted for her
beauty and talents, but infamous for her intrigues. She was married
three times; first, to Marcellus, her cousin; secondly, to Agrippa, by
whom she had five children; and thirdly, to the Emperor Tiberius. She
was banished on account of her conduct, and died in want.

OCTAVIA, the sister of Augustus, was noted for her beauty and
accomplishments, as well as for the nobility of her character. Her son
MARCELLUS was adopted by his uncle, but died young (23 B. C.). The
famous lines of Virgil upon this promising young man (Aeneid VI. 869-
887) were read before the Emperor and his sister, moving them to
tears, and winning for the author a munificent reward.

After the death of her first husband, Octavia was married to Mark
Antony, by whom she had two daughters, through whom she was the
ancestress of three Emperors, CLAUDIUS, CALIGULA, and NERO.

AGRIPPA (63-12), an eminent general and statesman, was a warm friend
and counsellor of Augustus. At the battle of Actium he commanded the
fleet of Octavius. He married Julia, the only daughter of the Emperor,
and had three sons, two of whom were adopted by Augustus, but died
before him; the third was murdered by Tiberius.

Augustus died at the age of seventy-six. He was frugal and correct in
his personal habits, quick and shrewd in his dealings with men, bold
and ambitious in the affairs of state. His greatness consisted rather
in the ability to abstain from abusing the advantages presented by
fortune, than in the genius which moulds the current of affairs to the
will. His success depended on the temper of the people and the
peculiar circumstances of the time. His clearest title to greatness is
found in the fact that he compelled eighty millions of people to live
in peace for more than forty years, He made the world to centre on one
will, and the horrors which mark the reigns of his successors were the
legitimate result of the irresponsible sovereignty he established. He
formed his empire for the present, to the utter ignoring of the
future. Thus it would seem that the part he played was that of a
shrewd politician, rather than that of a wise statesman.




CHAPTER XXXVII.

THE AUGUSTAN AGE.


In speaking of Augustus, we must take into account the writers whose
names have given to his its brightest lustre, and have made the
AUGUSTAN AGE a synonym for excellence in culture, art, and government.
Virgil, Ovid, Horace, Livy, and a host of others, have given his reign
a brilliancy unmatched in time, which is rather enhanced than
diminished by the fame of Cicero, Caesar, and Sallust, who preceded,
and that of Tacitus, Seneca, and others, who followed; for they belong
to an epoch in which Augustus stands the central figure in all which
pertains to the arts of peace.

In literature the name of VIRGIL stands first in the Augustan age.
Born at Andes, near Mantua, 15 October, 70, he was educated at Cremona
and Mediolánum. After completing his education he retired to his
paternal estate. In the division of land among the soldiers after the
battle of Philippi (42), he was deprived of his property, which was
subsequently restored to him by Augustus. He lived partly at Rome,
partly in Campania. His health was never good, and he died in his
fifty-second year (22 September, 19 B. C.).

Virgil had neither original nor creative genius. Though he mainly
imitated Greek poetry, his style is graceful and eloquent, his tone
inspiring and elevating.

In disposition he was childlike, innocent, and amiable,--a good son, a
faithful friend, honest, and full of devotion to persons and ideal
interests. He was not, however, fitted to grapple with the tasks and
difficulties of practical life.

In his fortunes and friends he was a happy man. Munificent patronage
gave him ample means of enjoyment and leisure; and he had the
friendship of all the most accomplished men of his day, among whom was
Horace, who entertained a strong affection for him. His fame, which
was established in his lifetime, was cherished after his death as an
inheritance in which every Roman had a share; and his works became
school-books even before the death of Augustus, and have continued
such ever since.

HORACE (65-8 B. C.) was born at Venusia, but received his education at
Rome and Athens. He was present at the battle of Philippi (42), where
he fought as Tribune under Brutus. His first writings were his
_Satires_. These he read to his friends, and their merit was at
once recognized. His great patron was MAECÉNAS, who introduced him to
the Emperor, and gave him a fine country seat near Tivoli, among the
Sabine Mountains. He died the same year as his patron, and was buried
beside him at the Esquiline Gate.

The poems of Horace give us a picture of refined and educated life in
the Rome of his time. They are unsurpassed in gracefulness and
felicity of thought. Filled with truisms, they were for centuries read
and quoted more than those of any other ancient writer.

OVID (43 B. C.-18 A. D.), a native of Sulmo, is far inferior to Virgil
and Horace as a poet, but ranks high on account of his great gift for
narration.

"Of the Latin poets he stands perhaps nearest to modern civilization,
partly on account of his fresh and vivid sense of the beauties of
nature, and partly because his subject is love. His representations of
this passion are graceful, and strikingly true. He also excelled other
poets in the perfect elegance of his form, especially in the character
and rhythm of his verses." He spent his last days in exile, banished
by Augustus for some reason now unknown. Some of his most pleasing
verses were written during this period.

One of the most noted men of the Augustan age was MAECÉNAS, the warm
friend and adviser of Augustus. He was a constant patron of the
literature and art of his generation. He was very wealthy, and his
magnificent house was the centre of literary society in Rome, He
helped both Virgil and Horace in a substantial manner, and the latter
is constantly referring to him in his poetry. He died (8 B. C.)
childless, and left his fortune to Augustus.

The prose writers who lived at this period were Livy, Sallust, and
Nepos.

LIVY is the best of these. He was a native of Patavium (Padua), a man
of rhetorical training, who spent most of his time in Rome. The
historical value of his work cannot be overestimated, on account of
the scarcity, and in many cases the utter lack, of other historical
documents on the times of which he wrote. His style is spirited, and
always interesting. His accuracy, however, is not to be compared with
that of Caesar. Only thirty-five out of the one hundred and forty-two
books that he wrote are preserved.

NEPOS was a prolific writer, but only a portion of one of his works,
_De Viris Illustribus_, has come down to us; it is neither
accurate nor interesting, and of little value.

SALLUST left two historical productions, one on the conspiracy of
Catiline, the other on the war with Jugurtha. His style is rhetorical.
He excels in delineating character, but he is often so concise as to
be obscure.

GAIUS ASINIUS POLLIO was a statesman and orator of marked attainments
of this time. He was strongly attached to the old republican
institutions, a man of great independence of character, and a poet of
no mean merit, as his contemporaries testify. Unfortunately, none of
his writings are preserved.

 The age of Augustus is also noted for the architectural improvements
in Rome. Augustus is said to have found a city of stone, and left one
of marble. He himself built twelve temples, and repaired eighty-two
that had fallen into decay. The FORUM was beautified by five halls of
justice (_Basilicae_), which were erected around its borders. The
most famous of these was the BASILICA JULIA, begun by Julius Caesar
and finished by Augustus. Public squares were planned and begun north
of the great Forum, the finest of which was the FORUM OF TRAJAN,
finished by the Emperor of that name.

The finest building outside of the city, in the Campus Martius, was
the PANTHEON, built by Agrippa, and now used as a Christian church.
Here are buried many distinguished men. Near by, Augustus erected a
mausoleum for himself. Here too was a theatre, built by Pompey,--the
first stone theatre of Rome.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

THE JULIAN AND CLAUDIAN EMPERORS.

TIBERIUS (14-37 A.D.)


Augustus was succeeded by TIBERIUS CLAUDIUS NERO CAESAR (born 42 B.
C.), the son of Tiberius Claudius Nero and Livia. His mother obtained
a divorce from Tiberius, and married Augustus.

Tiberius had great military talent. He was a severe disciplinarian,
and commanded the full confidence of his soldiers. As commander in
Cantabria, Armenia, Rhaetia, Dalmatia, and Germany, he conducted his
campaigns with success, and honor to himself. Returning to Rome in 7
B. C., he celebrated a triumph, and afterwards married Julia, the
dissolute daughter of Augustus. This marriage proved to be the ruin of
Tiberius, developing everything that was bad in his character, and
making him jealous, suspicious, and hypocritical.

Augustus, not relishing the changes in his character, sent him to
Rhodes, where he lived seven years in retirement. Through his mother's
influence, however, he was recalled in 2 A. D., and was afterwards
appointed the Emperor's successor. He ascended the throne at the
age of fifty-six. A silent man, "all his feelings, desires, and
ambitions were locked behind an impenetrable barrier." He is said but
once to have taken counsel with his officers. He was a master of
dissimulation, and on this account an object of dislike and suspicion.
But until his later years, his intellect was clear and far-seeing,
penetrating all disguises.

Throughout his reign Tiberius strove to do his duty to the Empire at
large, and maintained with great care the constitutional forms which
had been established by Augustus. Only two changes of importance were
made. First, the IMPERIAL GUARD, hitherto seen in the city only in
small bodies, was permanently encamped in full force close to the
walls. By this course the danger of riots was much lessened. Secondly,
the old COMITIAS were practically abolished. But the Senate was
treated with great deference.

Tiberius expended great care on the provinces. His favorite maxim was,
that a good shepherd should shear, and not flay, his sheep. Soldiers,
governors, and officials of all kinds were kept in a wholesome dread
of punishment, if they oppressed those under them. Strict economy in
public expenses kept the taxes down. Commerce was cherished, and his
reign on the whole was one of prosperity for the Empire.

Tiberius was noted especially for prosecutions for MAJESTAS, on the
slightest pretext. _Majestas_ nearly corresponds to treason; but
it is more comprehensive. One of the offences included in the word was
effecting, aiding in, or planning the death of a magistrate, or of one
who had the _imperium_ or _potestas_. Tiberius stretched the
application of this offence even to words or conduct which could in
any way be considered dangerous to the Emperor. A hateful class of
informers (_delatores_) sprung up, and the lives of all were rendered
unsafe. The dark side of this ruler's character is made specially
prominent by ancient historians; but their statements are beginning to
be taken with much allowance.

After a reign of twenty-three years, Tiberius died, either in a
fainting fit or from violence, at the age of seventy-nine.

LIVIA, the mother of Tiberius, deserves more than a passing notice.
She exercised almost a boundless influence on her husband, Augustus.
She had great ambition, and was very cruel and unscrupulous. She
managed to ruin, one after another, the large circle of relatives of
Augustus, until finally the aged Emperor found himself alone in the
palace with Livia and her son, Tiberius. All Rome execrated the
Empress, and her son feared and hated her. She survived Augustus
fifteen years, and died in 29. Tiberius refused to visit her on her
death-bed, and was not present at her funeral.

SEJÁNUS was the commander of the Praetorian Guard of Tiberius. He was
trusted fully by the Emperor, but proved to be a deep-dyed rascal. He
persuaded Livilla, the daughter-in-law of the Emperor, to poison her
husband, the heir apparent, and then he divorced his own wife to marry
her. He so maligned Agrippína, the widow of Germanicus and daughter of
Agrippa and Julia, that Tiberius banished her, with her sons Nero and
Drusus. In 26 he induced the Emperor to retire to the island of
Capreae, and he himself became the real master of Rome.

Tiberius at last finding out his true character, Sejánus was arrested
and executed in 31. His body was dragged through the streets, torn in
pieces by the mob, and thrown into the Tiber.


CALIGULA (37-41).

Tiberius having left no son, the Senate recognized Gaius Caesar, son
of Germanicus and Agrippína, grandson of Julia, and great-grandson of
Augustus, as Emperor. He is better known as CALIGULA,--a nickname
given him by the soldiers from the buskins he wore. He was twenty-five
years of age when he began to reign, of weak constitution, and subject
to fits. After squandering his own wealth, he killed rich citizens,
and confiscated their property. He seemed to revel in bloodshed, and
is said to have expressed a wish that the Roman people had but one
neck, that he might slay them all at a blow. He was passionately fond
of adulation, and often repaired to the Capitoline temple in the guise
of a god, and demanded worship. Four years of such a tyrant was
enough. He was murdered by a Tribune of his Praetorian Guard.


THE CLAUDIAN EMPERORS.

CLAUDIUS (41-54).


A strong party was now in favor of returning to a republican form of
government; but while the Senate was considering this question, the
Praetorian Guard settled it by proclaiming CLAUDIUS Emperor.

Claudius was the uncle of Caligula and the nephew of Tiberius. He was
a man of learning and good parts, but a glutton, and the slave of his
two wives, who were both bad women. His first wife, MESSALÍNA, was so
notorious that her name has became almost a synonym for wickedness.
His second wife, his niece AGRIPPÍNA, sister of Caligula, was nearly
as bad. This woman had by her former husband, Domitius, a son, whom
she induced the Emperor to adopt under the name of NERO. The faithless
wife then caused her husband to be poisoned, and her son to be
proclaimed Emperor.

At Rome the rule of Claudius was mild, and on the whole beneficial. In
the government of the provinces he was rigorous and severe. He
undertook the CONQUEST OF BRITAIN, and in a campaign of sixteen days
he laid the foundation of its final subjugation, which occurred about
forty years later, under the noted general AGRICOLA: It remained a
Roman province for four hundred years, but the people never
assimilated Roman customs, as did the Gauls, and when the Roman
garrisons were withdrawn, they quickly returned to their former
condition. However, many remains of Roman buildings in the island show
that it was for the time well under subjection.

The public works of Claudius were on a grand scale. He constructed a
new harbor at the mouth of the Tiber, and built the great aqueduct
called the AQUA CLAUDIA, the ruined arches of which can be seen to
this day. He also reclaimed for agriculture a large tract of land by
draining the Fucine Lake.


NERO (54-68).

NERO was but sixteen years old when he began to reign. For two or
three years he was under the influence of his tutor, SENECA, the
author, and BURRHUS, the Praefect of the Praetorian Guard, and his
government was during this period the most respectable of any since
the time of Augustus. His masters kept the young Emperor amused, and
removed from the cares of state. But he soon became infatuated with an
unscrupulous woman, POPPAEA SABÍNA, for whom he neglected and finally
killed his wife, Octavia.

It would be useless to follow in detail the crimes of Nero from this
time. A freedman, TIGELLÍNUS, became his adviser, and was the real
ruler of the Empire. He encouraged his master in all his vices and
wickedness. Poppaea died from a kick administered by Nero in anger;
Burrhus was disposed of; Agrippína, and Britannicus, the true heir to
the throne, were murdered. The wealthy were plundered, and the
feelings of his subjects outraged in every conceivable manner. The
Emperor appeared in public, contending first as a musician, and
afterwards in the sports of the circus.

The great fire of 18 July, 64, which destroyed a large part of the
city, was ascribed to him, but without sufficient evidence; and the
stories of his conduct during the conflagration are doubtless pure
fictions. It was necessary, however, to fix the guilt on some one; so
the CHRISTIANS, then a small sect, made up chiefly of the poorer
people, were accused of the crime, and persecuted without mercy. They
were often enclosed in fagots covered with pitch, and burned alive.

In rebuilding Rome, Nero took every precaution against the recurrence
of a conflagration. Broad regular streets replaced the narrow winding
alleys. The new houses were limited in height, built partly of hard
stone, and protected by open spaces and colonnades. The water supply
was also carefully regulated.

In addition to rebuilding the city, Nero gratified his love for the
magnificent by erecting a splendid palace, called the GOLDEN HOUSE.
Its walls were adorned with gold, precious stones, and masterpieces of
art from Greece. The grounds around were marvellous in their meadows,
lakes, groves, and distant views. In front was a colossal statue of
Nero himself, one hundred and ten feet high.

Conspiracies having been formed in which Seneca and Lucan were
implicated, both men were ordered to take their own lives. Nero's life
after this became still more infamous. In a tour made in Greece, he
conducted himself so scandalously that even Roman morals were shocked,
and Roman patience could endure him no longer. The Governor of Hither
Spain, GALBA, proclaimed himself Emperor, and marched upon Rome.
Verginius, the Governor of Upper Germany, also lent his aid to the
insurrection. The Senate proclaimed Nero a public enemy, and condemned
him to death. He fled from the city and put an end to his life, June
9, 68, just in time to escape capture. His statues were broken down,
his name everywhere erased, and his Golden House demolished. With him
ended the Claudian line of Emperors.

LUCIUS ANNAEUS SENECA (8 B. C.-65 A. D.) was born at Corduba in Spain,
of a Spanish Roman family, and was educated at Rome. His father was a
teacher of rhetoric, a man of wealth and literary attainments. Seneca
began to practise at the bar at Rome, and was gaining considerable
reputation, when in 41 he was banished to Corsica. Eight years later
he was recalled to be tutor of the young Nero, then eleven years old.
He was Consul in 57, and during the first years of Nero's reign he
shared the administration of affairs with the worthy Burrhus. His
influence over Nero, while it lasted, was salutary, though often
maintained by doubtful means. In course of time Nero began to dislike
him, and when Burrhus died his fate was sealed. By the Emperor's
command he committed suicide. Opening the veins in his feet and arms,
he discoursed with his friends on the brevity of life till death
ensued.

Seneca is the most eminent of the writers of his age. He wrote moral
essays, philosophical letters, physical treatises, and tragedies. Of
the last, the best are HERCULES FURENS, PHAEDRA, and MEDEA.


GALBA (68-69).--OTHO (69).--VITELLIUS (69).

GALBA entered the city as a conqueror, without much trouble, but on
account of his parsimony and austerity he soon became unpopular, and
was murdered by his mutinous soldiers fifteen days after he reached
Rome. He belonged to an old patrician family, and his overthrow was
sincerely regretted by the better element in the city.

OTHO, the first husband of Poppaea, and the leader in the insurrection
against Galba, was now declared Emperor. No sooner did the news of his
accession reach Gaul than VITELLIUS, a general of the army of the
Rhine, revolted. Otho marched against the rebels, was defeated, and
committed suicide after a reign of three months.

VITELLIUS had been a good soldier, but as a ruler he was weak and
incapable. He was killed after a reign of less than a year, during
which he had distinguished himself by gluttony and vulgar sensuality.




CHAPTER XXXIX.

THE FLAVIAN EMPERORS.

VESPASIAN (69-79).


The East now made a claim for the Emperor, and on July 1, 69, the
soldiers who were engaged in war against the revolted Jews in Judaea
proclaimed as Emperor their commander, TITUS FLAVIUS VESPASIÁNUS. He
left the conduct of the war in charge of his son Titus, and arrived at
Rome in 70. Here he overthrew and put to death Vitellius. In the
course of this struggle the Capitol was burned. This he restored,
rebuilding also a large part of the city.

In his own life Vespasian was simple, putting to shame the luxury and
extravagance of the nobles, and causing a marked improvement in the
general tone of society. He removed from the Senate many improper
members, replacing them by able men, among whom was AGRICOLA. In 70 he
put down a formidable rebellion in Gaul; and when his son Titus
returned from the capture of Jerusalem, [Footnote: Jerusalem was taken
in 70, after a siege of several months, the horrors of which have been
graphically detailed by the Jewish historian Joséphus, who was present
in the army of Titus. The city was destroyed, and the inhabitants sold
into slavery.] they enjoyed a joint triumph. The Temple of Janus was
closed, and peace prevailed during the remainder of his reign.

Much money was spent on public works, and in beautifying the city. A
new Forum was built, a Temple of Peace, public baths, and the famous
COLOSSÉUM was begun, receiving its name from the Colossus, a statue of
Nero, which had stood near by.

On the whole, Vespasian was active and prudent in public affairs,
frugal and virtuous in private life. The decade of his reign was
marked by peace and general prosperity.

One of the ablest men of this age was AGRICOLA (37-93). Born at Forum
Julii in Gaul, he was made Governor of Aquitania by Vespasian in 73.
Four years later he was Consul, and the next year was sent to Britain,
which he conquered, and governed with marked ability and moderation,
increasing the prosperity of the people and advancing their
civilization. He remained in Britain until 85, when he was recalled.
His life was written by his son-in-law, the historian Tacitus.


TITUS (79-81).

Vespasian was succeeded by his son TITUS, who emulated the virtues of
his father. He finished the Colosséum, begun by Vespasian, and built a
triumphal arch to commemorate his victories over the Jews. This arch,
called the ARCH OF TITUS, was built on the highest part of the Via
Sacra, and on its walls was carved a representation of the sacred
candlestick of the Jewish temple, which can still be seen.

It was during this reign that HERCULANEUM and POMPEII were destroyed
by an eruption of Vesuvius. In this eruption perished PLINY THE ELDER,
the most noted writer of his day. His work on _Natural History_,
the only one of his writings that is preserved, shows that he was a
true student. His passion for investigation led him to approach too
near the volcano, and caused his death.


DOMITIAN (81-96).

DOMITIAN was the opposite of his brother Titus,--cruel, passionate,
and extravagant. He was murdered after a reign of fifteen years,
during which he earned the hatred and contempt of his subjects by his
crimes and inconsistencies.

In his foreign policy Domitian showed considerable ability. He added
to the Empire that part of Germany which corresponds to modern Baden
and Wirtemberg, and built a line of fortifications from Mentz on the
Rhine to Ratisbon on the Danube.

With him ended the line of the FLAVIAN EMPERORS, and he was also the
last of the so called TWELVE CAESARS, a name given them by the
historian Suetonius.




CHAPTER XL.

THE FIVE GOOD EMPERORS.

NERVA (96-98).


NERVA was appointed by the Senate to succeed Domitian, and was the
first Emperor who did not owe his advancement to military force or
influence. He associated with himself MARCUS ULPIUS TRAJANUS, then in
command of the army on the Rhine. Nerva ruled only sixteen months; but
during that time he restored tranquillity among the people, conferring
happiness and prosperity upon every class.


TRAJAN (98-117).

Nerva was succeeded by TRAJAN, whose character has its surest guaranty
in the love and veneration of his subjects; and it is said that, long
afterwards, the highest praise that could be bestowed on a ruler was
that he was "more fortunate than Augustus, and better than Trajan."
Trajan was a soldier, and, if he lacked the refinements of a peaceful
life, he was nevertheless a wise and firm master.

He added to the Empire Dacia, the country included between the Danube
and the Theiss, the Carpathians and the Pruth. This territory became
so thoroughly Romanized that the language of its inhabitants to-day is
founded on that of their conquerors nearly eighteen centuries ago. It
was in honor of this campaign into Dacia that the famous COLUMN OF
TRAJAN, which still remains, was erected.

Trajan also annexed to the Empire Arabia Petraea, which afforded an
important route between Egypt and Syria. His invasion of Parthia,
however, resulted in no permanent advantage.

During the reign of Trajan the Roman Empire REACHED THE SUMMIT OF ITS
POWER; but the first signs of decay were beginning to be seen in the
financial distress of all Italy, and the decline of the free
peasantry, until in the next century they were reduced to a condition
of practical serfdom.

The literature of Trajan's reign was second only to that of the
Augustan age. His time has often been called the SILVER AGE. Its prose
writers were, however, unlike those of the Augustan age, far superior
to its poets. The most famous prose writers were TACITUS, PLINY THE
YOUNGER, and QUINTILIAN.

The poets of this period were JUVENAL, PERSIUS, MARTIAL, LUCAN, and
STATIUS, of whom the last two were of an inferior order.


HADRIAN (117-138).

Trajan was succeeded by his cousin's son, HADRIAN, a native of Spain.
One of the first acts of Hadrian was to relinquish the recent
conquests of Trajan, and to restore the old boundaries of the Empire.
The reasons for this were that they had reached the utmost limits
which could lend strength to the power of Rome, or be held in
subjection without constant and expensive military operations. The
people occupying the new conquests were hardy and warlike, scattered
over a country easy of defence, and certain to strive constantly
against a foreign yoke.

Hadrian displayed constant activity in travelling over the Empire, to
overlook personally its administration and protection. He visited
Britain, where he crushed the inroads of the Caledonians and built a
fortified line of works, known as the PICTS' WALL, extending from sea
to sea. The remains of this great work are still to be seen,
corresponding nearly to the modern boundary between England and
Scotland. He also visited the East, where the Jews were making serious
trouble, and completed their overthrow.

On his return to the city, the Emperor devoted himself to its
adornment. Several of his works, more or less complete, still remain.
The most famous of these is the MAUSOLÉUM (Tomb) OF HADRIAN, now known
as the Castle of San Angelo.

Hadrian was afflicted with bad health, suffering much from diseases
from which he could find no relief. On account of this, and to secure
a proper succession, he associated with himself in the government
TITUS AURELIUS ANTONÍNUS, and required him to adopt Marcus Annius
Verus and Lucius Verus. In 138, soon after this arrangement was made,
Hadrian died, leaving the Empire to Titus.


TITUS AURELIUS ANTONÍNUS PIUS (138-161).

ANTONÍNUS, a native of Gaul, was fifty-two years old when he succeeded
to the throne. The cognomen PIUS was conferred upon him by the Senate
on account of the affectionate respect which he had shown for Hadrian.
He was a man of noble appearance, firm and prudent, and under him the
affairs of state moved smoothly.


MARCUS AURELIUS ANTONÍNUS (161-180).

On the death of Antonínus, Marcus Annius Verus succeeded him under the
title of Marcus Aurelius Antonínus.

The Moors made an invasion into Spain; the barbarians broke into Gaul;
the army in Britain attempted to set up another Emperor; and the
Parthians in the East were in an uneasy state. The Eastern war,
however, ended favorably, and the Parthian king purchased peace by
ceding Mesopotamia to Rome. But the returning army brought with it a
pestilence, which spread devastation throughout the West. The
Christians were charged with being the cause of the plague, and were
cruelly persecuted. Among the victims were Justin Martyr at Rome, and
Polycarp at Smyrna.

The death of Lucius Verus in 168 released Aurelius from a colleague
who attracted attention only by his unfitness for his position. The
Emperor was thus relieved of embarrassments which might well have
become his greatest danger. The remainder of his reign, however, was
scarcely less unhappy.

The dangers from the troublesome barbarians grew greater and greater.
Rome had now passed the age of conquest, and began to show inability
even to defend what she had acquired. For fourteen years Aurelius was
engaged on the frontiers fighting these barbarians, and endeavoring to
check their advance. He died at Vienna while thus occupied, in the
fifty-ninth year of his life (180).

Peace was shortly afterwards made with the barbarians, a peace bought
with money; an example often followed in later times, when Rome lacked
the strength and courage to enforce her wishes by force of arms.

Marcus Aurelius was the PHILOSOPHER of the Empire. His tastes were
quiet; he was unassuming, and intent on the good of the people. His
faults were amiable weaknesses; his virtues, those of a hero. His
_Meditations_ have made him known as an author of fine tastes and
thoughts. With him ended the line of the GOOD EMPERORS. After his
death, Rome's prosperity and power began rapidly to wane.


THE CHRISTIANS.

The CHRISTIANS, who were gradually increasing in numbers, were
persecuted at different times throughout the Empire. One ground for
these persecutions was that it was a crime against the state to refuse
to worship the gods of the Romans under whom the Empire had
flourished. It was also the custom to burn incense in front of the
Emperor's statue, as an act of adoration. The Christians not only
refused homage to the Roman gods, but denounced the burning of incense
as sacrilegious. AURELIUS gave his sanction to the most general
persecution this sect had yet suffered. The last combined effort to
suppress them was under DIOCLETIAN, in 284, but it ended with the
EDICT OF MILAN in 312, which famous decree gave the imperial license
to the religion of Christ.




CHAPTER XLI.

PERIOD OF MILITARY DESPOTISM.--DECLINE OF THE EMPIRE.

COMMODUS (180-192).


On the death of Aurelius, his son, Commodus, hastened to Rome, and was
received by both the Senate and army without opposition. His character
was the opposite of that of his good father. In ferocity and
vindictiveness he was almost unequalled, even among the Emperors of
unhappy Rome. By means of informers, who were well paid, he rid
himself of the best members of the Senate. His government became so
corrupt, he himself so notorious in crime, that he was unendurable.
His proudest boasts were of his triumphs in the amphitheatre, and of
his ability to kill a hundred lions with as many arrows. After a reign
of twelve years his servants rid the Empire of his presence.


PERTINAX (192-193).

PERTINAX, the Praefect of the city, an old and experienced Senator,
followed Commodus. His reign of three months was well meant, but as it
was not supported by the military it was of no effect. His attempted
reforms were stopped by his murder.


JULIANUS (193).--SEPTIMIUS SEVERUS (193-211).

The Praetorians now offered the crown to the highest bidder, who
proved to be DIDIUS JULIÁNUS, a wealthy Senator. He paid about a
thousand dollars to each soldier of the Guard, twelve thousand in
number. After enjoying the costly honor two months he was deposed and
executed.

In the mean time several soldiers had been declared Emperor by their
respective armies. Among them was SEPTIMIUS SEVÉRUS, an African,
belonging to the army of the Danube.

Sevérus was an able soldier. He disarmed the Praetorians, banished
them from Rome, and filled their place with fifty thousand
legionaries, who acted as his body guard. The person whom he placed in
command of this guard was made to rank next to himself, with
legislative, judicial, and financial powers. The Senate he reduced to
a nonentity.

After securing the capital, Sevérus carried on a campaign against the
Parthians, and was victorious over the rulers of Mesopotamia and
Arabia. In 203 he erected, in commemoration of these victories, a
magnificent arch, which still stands at the head of the Forum. He died
at Eboracum (York), in Britain, while making preparations for a
campaign against the Caledonians.


CARACALLA, MACRINUS, AND HELIOGABALUS.

Sevérus left two sons, both of whom he had associated with himself in
the government. No sooner was he dead than they quarrelled, and the
elder, CARACALLA, murdered the other with his own hand in the presence
of their mother.

Caracalla was blood-thirsty and cruel. After a short reign (211-216)
he was murdered by one of his soldiers. By him were begun the famous
baths which bore his name, and of which extensive remains still exist.
Caracalla was succeeded by MACRÍNUS, who reigned but one year, and was
followed by HELIOGABALUS (218-222), a priest of the sun, a true
Oriental, with but few virtues. His end was like that of his
predecessors. The Praetorians revolted and murdered him.


FROM ALEXANDER SEVERUS TO THE AGE OF THE THIRTY TYRANTS (222-268).

ALEXANDER SEVÉRUS was a good man, and well educated. But he endeavored
in vain to check the decline of the state. The military had become all
powerful, and he could effect nothing against it. During his reign
(222-235), the famous baths begun by Caracalla were finished.

Sevérus was killed in a mutiny led by MAXIMIN, who was Emperor for
three years (235-238), and was then murdered by his mutinous soldiers.

GORDIAN, his successor (238-244), was also slain by his own soldiers
in his camp on the Euphrates, and PHILIP (244-249) and DECIUS (249-
251) both fell in battle. Under Decius was begun a persecution of the
Christians severer than any that preceded it.

The next seventeen years (251-268) is a period of great confusion.
Several generals in different provinces were declared Emperor. The
Empire nearly fell to pieces, but finally rallied without loss of
territory. Its weakness, however, was apparent to all. This period is
often called the AGE OF THE THIRTY TYRANTS.




FIVE GOOD EMPERORS (268-283).


FIVE GOOD EMPERORS now ruled and revived somewhat the shattered
strength of the government: CLAUDIUS (268-270); AURELIAN (270-275);
TACITUS (275-276); PROBUS (276-282); and CARUS (282-283). Aurelian
undertook a campaign against the famous ZENOBIA, Queen of PALMÝRA. In
her he found a worthy foe, one whose political ability was rendered
more brilliant by her justice and courage. Defeated in the field, she
fortified herself in Palmýra, which was taken after a siege and
destroyed. Zenobia was carried to Rome, where she graced the triumph
of her conqueror, but was afterwards permitted to live in retirement.
Aurelian was the first who built the walls of Rome in their present
position.


DIOCLETIAN (284-305).

With this ruler, the last vestige of the old republican form of
government at Rome disappears. Old Rome was dead. Her Senate had lost
the last remnant of its respectability. Seeing the necessity of a more
united country and a firmer rule, DIOCLETIAN associated with himself
MAXIMIAN, a gigantic soldier, who signalized his accession by subduing
a dangerous revolt in Gaul. He also appointed two officers, GALERIUS
and CONSTANTIUS, whom he called CAESARS,--one to have charge of the
East, and the other of the West. By means of these assistants he
crushed all revolts, strengthened the waning power of the Empire, and
imposed peace and good order upon the world.

Diocletian and Maximian afterwards resigned, and allowed their two
Caesars to assume the rank of AUGUSTI, and they in their turn
appointed Caesars as assistants.

Soon after his accession Constantius died, and his son CONSTANTINE
was proclaimed Caesar, against the wishes of Galerius. A bitter struggle
followed, in which Constantine finally overcame all his opponents, and
was declared sole Emperor. For his successes he was named the GREAT.


CONSTANTINE THE GREAT (306-337).

Constantine determined to build for his Empire a new capital, which
should be worthy of him. He selected the site of BYZANTIUM as offering
the greatest advantages; for, being defended on three sides by the sea
and the Golden Horn, it could easily be made almost impregnable, while
as a seaport its advantages were unrivalled,--a feature not in the
least shared by Rome. The project was entered upon with energy; the
city was built, and named CONSTANTINOPLE. To people it, the seat of
government was permanently removed thither, and every inducement was
offered to immigration. Thus was born the GREEK EMPIRE, destined to
drag out a miserable existence for nearly a thousand years after Rome
had fallen a prey to the barbarians. Its founder died, after a reign
of thirty years, in his sixty-fourth year (337).

Constantine is entitled to great credit for the uniform kindness with
which he treated his Christian subjects. It is said that his mother,
HELENA, was a Christian, and that it was to her influence that this
mildness was due. The sect, notwithstanding many persecutions, had
kept on increasing, until now we find them a numerous and quite
influential body. It was during his reign that the DECREE OF MILAN was
issued, in 313, giving the imperial license to the religion of Christ;
and also in this reign the famous COUNCIL OF NICE, in Bithynia (325),
met to settle questions of creed.

In person Constantine was tall and majestic: he was dexterous in all
warlike accomplishments; intrepid in war, affable in peace; patient
and prudent in council, bold and unhesitating in action. Ambition
alone led him to attack the East; and the very madness of jealousy
marked his course after his success. He was filial in his affection
towards his mother; but he can scarcely be called affectionate who put
to death his father-in-law, his brother-in-law, his wife, and his son.
If he was great in his virtues, in his faults he was contemptible.


DECLINE OF THE EMPIRE.

Constantine was succeeded by his three sons, CONSTANTINE II.,
CONSTANTIUS, and CONSTANS, who divided the Empire among themselves
(337-353). Constantine and Constans almost at once quarrelled over the
possession of Italy, and the difficulty was ended only by the death of
the former. The other two brothers lived in harmony for some time,
because the Persian war in the East occupied Constantius, while
Constans was satisfied with a life of indolence and dissipation.
Constans was murdered in 350, and his brother was sole Emperor. He
died ten years later, and was succeeded by his cousin, Julian (360-
363)

JULIAN was a good soldier, and a man calculated to win the love and
respect of all. But he attempted to restore the old religion, and thus
gained for himself the epithet of APOSTATE. The Christians, however,
had too firm a hold on the state to admit of their powers being
shaken. The failure of Julian precluded any similar attempt afterward.
After a reign of three years, he was killed in an expedition against
the Persians. His successor, JOVIAN (363-364), who was chosen by the
army, died after a reign of only seven months.

VALENTINIAN and VALENS (364-375). After a brief interregnum, the
throne was bestowed on Valentinian, who associated with himself his
brother Valens. The Empire was divided. Valens took the East, with
Constantinople as his capital. Valentinian took the West, making MILAN
the seat of his government. So completely had Rome fallen from her
ancient position, that it is very doubtful if this monarch ever
visited the city during his reign. [Footnote: Since the building of
Constantinople no Emperor had lived in Rome. She had ceased to be
mistress even of the West, and rapidly fell to the rank of a
provincial city.] He died during a campaign on the Danube. His son
GRATIAN (375-383) succeeded him. He discouraged Paganism, and under
him Christianity made rapid strides. His uncle Valens was slain in a
battle against the Goths; but so completely were the Eastern and
Western Empires now separated, that Gratian did not attempt to make
himself sole ruler, but appointed THEODOSIUS to the empty throne.
Gratian, like so many of his predecessors, was murdered. His
successors, MAXIMUS (383-388), VALENTINIAN II. (388-392), and EUGENIUS
(392-394), were either deposed or assassinated, and again there was,
for a short time, one ruler of the whole Empire, THEODOSIUS, whom
Gratian had made Emperor of the East. He was sole Emperor for one year
(394-395). On his death his two sons divided the Empire, HONORIUS
(395-423) taking the West, and Arcadius the East.

Honorius was only six years old when he began to reign. He was placed
under the care of a Vandal named STILICHO, to whom he was allied by
marriage. Stilicho was a man of ability. The barbarians were driven
from the frontiers on the Rhine and in Britain; a revolt in Africa was
suppressed. Honorius himself was weak and jealous. He did not hesitate
to murder Stilicho as soon as he was old enough to see the power he
was wielding. With Stilicho's death his fortune departed. Rome was
besieged, captured, and sacked by the barbarian ALARIC, in 410. When
this evil was past, numerous contestants arose in different parts of
the Empire, each eager for a portion of the fabric which was now so
obviously crumbling to pieces.

Honorius was succeeded, after one of the longest reigns of the
imperial line, by VALENTINIAN III. (423-455). The Empire was but a
relic of its former self. Gaul, Spain, and Britain were practically
lost; Illyria and Pannonia were in the hands of the Goths; and Africa
was soon after seized by the barbarians. Valentinian was fortunate in
the possession of AETIUS, a Scythian by birth, who for a time upheld
the Roman name, winning for himself the title of LAST OF THE ROMANS.
He was assassinated by his ungrateful master. A few months later, in
455, the Emperor himself was killed by a Senator, MAXIMUS, who
succeeded him, but for only three months, when AVÍTUS (455-456), a
noble of Gaul, became Emperor. He was deposed by RICIMER (457-467), a
Sueve, of considerable ability, who for some time managed the affairs
of the Empire, making and unmaking its monarchs at pleasure. After the
removal of Avítus, ten months were allowed to elapse before a
successor was appointed; and then the crown was bestowed upon
MAJORIAN (457-461). SEVÉRUS followed him, a man too weak to interfere
with the plans of Ricimer.

After his death, Ricimer ruled under the title of PATRICIAN, until the
people demanded an Emperor, and he appointed ANTHEMIUS (467-472), who
attempted to strengthen his position by marrying a daughter of
Ricimer; but jealousy soon sprang up between them. Ricimer invited a
horde of barbarians from across the Alps, with whom he captured and
sacked Rome, and killed Anthemius. Shortly after, Ricimer himself
died.

Names which appear only as names now follow each other in rapid
succession. Finally, in 476, ZENO, Emperor of the East, declared the
office of EMPEROR OF THE WEST abolished, and gave the government of
the DIOCESE OF ITALY to ODOÁCER, with the title of Patrician.




CHAPTER XLII.

INVASIONS AND DISTRIBUTION OF THE BARBARIANS.


The sieges and captures of Rome by the Barbarians we present in a
separate chapter, instead of in the narrative of the Emperors, because
by this plan a better idea of the operations can be given; and
especially because we can thus obtain a clearer and more comprehensive
conception of the rise of the nations, which, tearing in pieces the
Roman Empire, have made up Modern Europe.

The HUNS, who originated the movement which overthrew the Western
Empire, came, it is supposed, from the eastern part of Asia. As they
moved westward, their march was irresistible. In 395 they met and
defeated the GOTHS, a powerful tribe that lived to the north of the
Danube, and who were ruled by a king named Hermanric.

The Gothic nation consisted of two branches, the OSTROGOTHS, Eastern
Goths, and the VISIGOTHS, Western Goths, Of these the Ostrogoths were
the more powerful, but on the approach of the Huns they were obliged
to submit. The Huns moved on, and found but little trouble in
overrunning the country of the Visigoths, who were so terrified by the
hideous appearance and wild shouts of the Huns that they fled to the
Danube, and besought the Romans to allow them to cross the river and
take refuge in their territory. The favor was granted, but the
refugees were treated with indignity, and compelled to undergo every
privation.

Subsequently a remnant of the Ostrogoths arrived at the Danube, also
desiring to cross. To them permission was refused, but they seized
shipping and crossed, despite the prohibition of the Romans. They
found the condition of their brethren, the Visigoths, so sad, that
they united with them in open revolt, defeated a Roman army sent
against them, and ravaged Thrace. The Emperor Valens took the field in
person, and was defeated (378). The Goths then moved southward and
westward into Greece, everywhere pillaging the country.

When Theodosius became Emperor, he acted cautiously, fortifying strong
points from which to watch the enemy and select a favorable moment for
an attack. At length he surprised their camp and gained a complete
victory. The Goths were taken into the service of the Empire, and the
first chapter of the barbarian invasion of the Empire was brought to a
close.

We now meet two of the great names connected with the fall of Rome,
ALARIC and STILICHO.

Theodosius was succeeded by Arcadius, and before the end of the year
the Goths broke into open revolt under their leader, Alaric. Athens
was compelled to pay a ransom; Corinth, Argos, and Sparta were taken
and plundered. No place was strong enough to offer effectual
resistance. At this juncture, Stilicho, General of the Western Empire,
hastened to the scene, and succeeded in surrounding the Goths, but
Alaric burst through his lines and escaped. He then made peace with
Constantinople, and the office of Master-General of Illyricum was
bestowed upon him. How sincere the barbarian was in his offers of
peace may be seen from the fact that in two years he invaded Italy
(400).

Honorius, who was then Emperor of the West, was a man so weak that
even the genius of Stilicho could not save him. No sooner did he hear
of the approach of Alaric, than he hastened to a place of safety for
himself, leaving Stilicho to defend Rome. Troops were called from
Britain, Gaul, and the other provinces far and near, leaving their
places vacant and defenceless. Honorius, who had attempted to escape
to Gaul, was surprised by Alaric, and, taking refuge in the fortified
town of Asta, was there besieged until the arrival of the brave
Stilicho, who attacked the besiegers, and after a bloody fight utterly
routed them. In his retreat, Alaric attempted to attack Verona, but he
was again defeated, and escaped only by the fleetness of his horse.
Honorius returned home (404), and enjoyed a triumph.

Rome had scarcely time to congratulate herself upon her escape from
the Goths, when she was threatened by a new enemy.

The Huns, pushing westward, had dislodged the northern tribes of
Germany who dwelt on the Baltic. These were the Alans, Sueves,
Vandals, and Burgundians. Under the leadership of RADAGAISUS, these
tribes invaded Italy with about two hundred thousand men. They were
met near Florence by Stilicho, and totally defeated (406). Radagaisus
himself was killed. The survivors turned backward, burst into Gaul,
ravaged the lower portion of the country, and finally separated. One
portion, the Burgundians, remained on the frontier, and from their
descendants comes the name of Burgundy.

The Alans, Sueves, and Vandals pushed on into Spain, where they
established kingdoms. The Alans occupied the country at the foot of
the Pyrenees, but were soon after subdued by the Visigoths. The Sueves
settled in the northwest of Spain, but met the same fate as the Alans.
The Vandals occupied the southern part, and from there crossed over to
Africa, where they maintained themselves for nearly a century, and at
one time were powerful enough, as we shall see, to capture Rome
itself.

Rome was now for a time delivered from her enemies, and the Emperor,
no longer needing Stilicho, was easily persuaded that he was plotting
for the throne. He was put to death, with many of his friends.

With Stilicho Rome fell. Scarcely two months after his death, Alaric
again appeared before Rome. He sought to starve the city into
submission. Famine and pestilence raged within its walls. Finally
peace was purchased by a large ransom, and Alaric withdrew, but soon
returned. The city was betrayed, and after a lapse of eight centuries
became the second time a prey to the barbarians (24 August, 410).

The city was plundered for five days, and then Alaric withdrew to
ravage the surrounding country. But the days of this great leader were
almost spent. Before the end of the year he died, and shortly after
his army marched into France, where they established a kingdom
reaching from the Loire and the Rhone to the Straits of Gibraltar.

The GERMANS, under their king, CLODION, prompted by the example of the
Burgundians and Visigoths, began, about 425, a series of attempts to
enlarge their boundaries. They succeeded in establishing themselves
firmly in all the country from the Rhine to the Somme, and under the
name of FRANKS founded the present French nation in France (447).

Clodion left two sons, who quarrelled over the succession. The elder
appealed to the Huns for support, the younger to Rome.

The Huns at this time were ruled by ATTILA, "the Scourge of God." The
portrait of this monster is thus painted. His features bore the mark
of his Eastern origin. He had a large head, a swarthy complexion,
small deep-seated eyes, a flat nose, a few hairs in the place of a
beard, broad shoulders, and a short square body, of nervous strength
though disproportioned form. This man wielded at will, it is said, an
army of over half a million troops.

At the time he received from the son of Clodion the invitation to
interfere in the affairs of Gaul, Attila was already contemplating an
invasion of both the Western and Eastern Empires; but the prospect of
an ally in Gaul, with an opportunity of afterwards attacking Italy
from the west, was too favorable to be neglected.

A march of six hundred miles brought the Huns to the Rhine. Crossing
this, they continued their progress, sacking and burning whatever
cities lay in their route.

The Visigoths under Theodoric, joining the Romans under Aetius, met
the Huns near Orleans. Attila retreated towards Chalons, where, in
451, was fought a great battle, which saved the civilization of
Western Europe. Attila began the attack. He was bravely met by the
Romans; and a charge of the Visigoths completed the discomfiture of
the savages. Aetius did not push his victory, but allowed the Huns to
retreat in the direction of Italy. The "Scourge" first attacked,
captured, and rased to the ground Aquileia. He then scoured the whole
country, sparing only those who preserved their lives by the surrender
of their wealth.

It was to this invasion that VENICE owed its rise. The inhabitants,
who fled from the approach of the Huns, found on the islands in the
lagoons at the head of the Adriatic a harbor of safety.

Attila died shortly after (453) from the bursting of a blood-vessel,
and with his death the empire of the Huns ceased to exist. The
VANDALS, we have seen, had established themselves in Africa. They were
now ruled by GENSERIC. Carthage was their head-quarters, and they were
continually ravaging the coasts of the Mediterranean with their
fleets.

Maximus, Emperor of Rome (455), had forcibly married Eudoxia, the
widow of the previous Emperor, Valentinian, whom he had killed. She in
revenge sent to Genseric a secret message to attack Rome. He at once
set sail for the mouth of the Tiber. The capital was delivered into
his hands on his promise to spare the property of the Church (June,
455), and for fourteen days the Vandals ravaged it at pleasure.
Genseric then left Rome, taking with him Eudoxia.

This was the last sack of the city by barbarians. But twenty-one years
elapsed before the Roman Empire came to an end (476).




CHAPTER XLIII.

ROMAN LITERATURE.

PLAUTUS (254-184).


PLAUTUS, the comic poet, was one of the earliest of Roman writers.
Born at Sarsina in Umbria, of free parentage, he at first worked on
the stage at Rome, but lost his savings in speculation. Then for some
time he worked in a treadmill, but finally gained a living by
translating Greek comedies into Latin. Twenty of his plays have come
down to us. They are lively, graphic, and full of fun, depicting a
mixture of Greek and Roman life.


TERENCE (195-159).

TERENCE was a native of Carthage. He was brought to Rome at an early
age as a slave of the Senator Terentius, by whom he was educated and
liberated. Six of his comedies are preserved. Like the plays of
Plautus, they are free translations from the Greek, and of the same
general character.


ENNIUS (139-69).

QUINTUS ENNIUS, a native of Rudiae, was taken to Rome by Cato the
Younger. Here he supported himself by teaching Greek. His epic poem,
the _Annàles_, relates the traditional Roman history, from the
arrival of Aenéas to the poet's own day.


CICERO (106-43).

MARCUS TULLIUS CICERO, a native of Arpínum, ranks as the first prose
writer in Roman literature. As an orator Cicero had a very happy
natural talent. The extreme versatility of his mind, his lively
imagination, his great sensitiveness, his inexhaustible richness of
expression, which was never at a loss for a word or tone to suit any
circumstances or mood, his felicitous memory, his splendid voice and
impressive figure, all contributed to render him a powerful speaker.
He himself left nothing undone to attain perfection. Not until he had
spent a long time in laborious study and preparation did he make his
_début_ as an orator; nor did he ever rest and think himself
perfect, but, always working, made the most careful preparation for
every case. Each success was to him only a step to another still
higher achievement; and by continual meditation and study he kept
himself fully equipped for his task. Hence he succeeded, as is
universally admitted, in gaining a place beside Demosthenes, or at all
events second only to him.

There are extant fifty-seven orations of Cicero, and fragments of
twenty more. His famous _Philippics_ against Antony caused his
proscription by the Second Triumvirate, and his murder near his villa
at Formiae, in December, 43.

His chief writings on rhetoric were _De Oratore; Brutus de Claris
Oratoribus;_ and _Orator ad M. Brutum_. Cicero was a lover of
philosophy, and his writings on the subject were numerous. Those most
read are _De Senectute, De Amicitia,_ and _De Officiis_.

Eight hundred and sixty-four of Cicero's letters are extant, and they
furnish an inexhaustible treasure of contemporaneous history.


CAESAR (100-44).

Of CAESAR'S literary works the most important are his
_Commentarii_, containing the history of the first seven years of
the Gallic war, and the history of the civil strife down to the
Alexandrine war. The account of his last year in Gaul was written
probably by Aulus Hirtius; that of the Alexandrine, African, and
Spanish wars, by some unknown hand. As an orator, Caesar ranks next to
Cicero.


NEPOS (94-24).

CORNELIUS NEPOS, a native of Northern Italy, was a friend of both
Cicero and Atticus. He was a prolific writer, but only his _De Viris
Illustribus_ is preserved. It shows neither historical accuracy nor
good style.


LUCRETIUS (98-55).

TITUS LUCRETIUS CARUS has left a didactic poem, _De Rerum
Natura_. The tone of the work is sad, and in many places bitter.


CATULLUS (87-47).

GAIUS VALERIUS CATULLUS, of Veróna, is the greatest lyric poet of
Roman literature. One hundred and sixteen of his poems are extant.


VIRGIL (70-19).

The great epic Roman poet was VIRGIL. His _Aenéis_, in twelve
books, gives an account of the wanderings and adventures of Aenéas,
and his struggles to found a city in Italy. The poem was not revised
when Virgil died, and it was published contrary to his wishes.

Besides the _Aenéis_, Virgil wrote the _Bucolica_, ten
Eclogues imitated and partially translated from the Greek poet
Theocritus. The _Georgica_, a poem of four books on agriculture
in its different branches, is considered his most finished work, and
the most perfect production of Roman art-poetry. (See page 179.)


HORACE (65-8).

QUINTUS HORATIUS FLACCUS left four books of Odes, one of Epodes, two
of Satires, two of Epistles, and the _Ars Poetica_. (See page
180.)


TIBULLUS (54-29).

ALBIUS TIBULLUS, an elegiac poet, celebrated in exquisitely fine poems
the beauty and cruelty of his mistresses.


PROPERTIUS (49-15).

SEXTUS PROPERTIUS, a native of Umbria, was also an elegiac poet, and
wrote mostly on love.


OVID (43 B.C.--18 A.D.)

PUBLIUS OVIDIUS NASO left three books of _Amores_; one of
_Heroides_; the _Ars Amatoria_; _Remedia Amoris_; the
_Metamorphoses_ (fifteen books); the _Tristia_; and the
_Fasti_. (See page 181.)


LIVY (59 B.C.--17 A.D.).

TITUS LIVIUS left a history of Rome, of which thirty-five books have
been preserved. (See page 181.)


PHAEDRUS.

PHAEDRUS, a writer of fables, flourished in the reign of Tiberius (14-
37). He was originally a slave. His fables are ninety-seven in number,
and are written in iambic verse.


SENECA (8 B.C.--65 A.D.)

For an account of this writer see the chapter on the Emperor Nero,
page 189.


CURTIUS.

QUINTUS CURTIUS RUFUS was a historian who lived in the reign of
Claudius (50 A.D.). He wrote a history of the exploits of Alexander
the Great.


PERSIUS (34-62).

PERSIUS, a poet of the reign of Nero, was a native of Volaterrae. He
wrote six satires, which are obscure and hard to understand.


LUCAN (39-65).

LUCAN, a nephew of Seneca, wrote an epic poem (not finished) called
_Pharsalia_, upon the civil war between Caesar and Pompey.


PLINY THE ELDER (23-79).

GAIUS PLINIUS SECUNDUS, of Northern Italy, was a great scholar in
history, grammar, rhetoric, and natural science. His work on
_Natural History_ has come down to us.


STATIUS, MARTIAL, QUINTILIAN, JUVENAL.

STATIUS (45-96), a native of Naples, had considerable poetical talent.
He wrote the _Thebaid_, the _Achilleis_ (unfinished), and the
_Silvae_.

MARTIAL (42-102), wrote sharp and witty epigrams, of which fifteen
books are extant. He was a native of Spain.

QUINTILIAN (35-95), was also a native of Spain. He was a teacher of
eloquence for many years in Rome. His work _On the Training of an
Orator_, is preserved.

JUVENAL(47-130), of Aquínum, was a great satirist, who described and
attacked bitterly the vices of Roman society. Sixteen of his satires
are still in existence.

TACITUS (54-119). CORNELIUS TACITUS was the great historian of his
age. His birthplace is unknown. His writings are interesting and of a
high tone, but often tinged with prejudice, and hence unfair. He
wrote,--

1. A dialogue on orators.
2. A biography of his father-in-law,
Agricola.
3. A description of the habits of the people of Germany.
4. A history of the reigns of Galba, Otho, Vespasian, Titus, and
Domitian (_Historiae_).
5. _Annales_, a narrative of the events of the reigns of Tiberius,
Caligula, Claudius, and Nero.


PLINY THE YOUNGER (62-113). Pliny the Younger was the adopted son of
Pliny the Elder. He was a voluminous correspondent. We have nine books
of his letters, relating to a large number of subjects, and presenting
vivid pictures of the times in which he lived. Their diction is fluent
and smooth.




CHAPTER XLIV.

ROMAN ROADS.--PROVINCES.


The Romans were famous for their excellent public roads, from thirteen
to fifteen feet wide. The roadbed was formed of four distinct layers,
placed above the foundation. The upper layer was made of large
polygonal blocks of the hardest stone, fitted and joined together so
as to make an even surface. On each side of the road were footpaths
strewn with gravel. Stone blocks for the use of equestrians were at
regular distances, and also milestones telling the distance from Rome.

There were four main public roads:--

1. VIA APPIA, from Rome to Capua, Beneventum, Tarentum, and
Brundisium.

2. VIA LATÍNA, from Rome to Aquínum and Teánum, joining the Via Appia
at Beneventum.

3. VIA FLAMINIA, the great northern road. In Umbria, near Ocriculum
and Narnia, a branch went east through Spoletium, joining the main
line at Fulsinia. It then continued through Fanum, Flaminii, and
Nuceria, where it again divided, one branch going to Fanum Fortúnae on
the Adriatic, the other to Ancóna, and from there along the coast to
Fanum Fortúnae, where the two branches, again uniting, passed on to
Ariminum through Pisaurum. From here it was extended, under the name
of VIA AEMILIA, into the heart of Cisalpine Gaul, through Bononia,
Mutina, Parma, and Placentia, where it crossed the Po, to Mediolánum.

4. VIA AURELIA, the great coast road, reached the west coast at
Alsium, following the shore along through Etruria and Liguria, by
Genua, as far as Forum Julii, in Gaul.


PROVINCES.

After the conquest of Italy, all the additional Roman dominions were
divided into provinces. Sicily was the first Roman province. At first
Praetors were appointed to govern these provinces; but afterwards
persons who had been Praetors at Rome were appointed at the expiration
of their office, with the title of PROPRAETOR. Later, the Consuls
also, at the end of their year of office, were sent to govern
provinces, with the title of PROCONSUL. Such provinces were called
_Provinciae Consuláres_. The provinces were generally distributed
by lot, but their distribution was sometimes arranged by agreement
among those entitled to them. The tenure of office was usually a year,
but it was frequently prolonged. When a new governor arrived in the
province, his predecessor was expected to leave within thirty days.

The governor was assisted by two QUAESTORS, who had charge of the
financial duties of the government. Originally the governor was
obliged to account at Rome for his administration, from his own books
and those of the Quaestors; but after 61 B. C., he was obliged to
deposit two copies of his accounts in the two chief cities of his
province, and to forward a third to Rome.

If the governor misconducted himself in the performance of his
official duties, the provincials might apply for redress to the
Senate, and to influential Romans who were their patrons.

The governor received no salary, but was allowed to exact certain
contributions from the people of the province for the support of
himself and his retinue, which consisted of quaestors, secretary,
notary, lictors, augurs, and public criers. His authority was supreme
in military and civil matters, and he could not be removed from
office. But after his term had ended, he could be tried for
mismanagement.

Many of the governors were rascals, and obtained by unfair means vast
sums of money from the provincials. One of the most notorious of these
was Verres, against whom Cicero delivered his Verrine orations.

At the time of the battle of Actium there were eighteen provinces;
viz. Sicilia (227 [Footnote: The figures in parentheses indicate the
date at which the province was established.]), Sardinia and Corsica
(227), Hispania Citerior (205), Hispania Ulterior (205), Illyricum
(167), Macedonia (146), Africa (146), Asia (133), Achaia (146), Gallia
Citerior (80), Gallia Narbonensis (118), Cilicia (63), Syria (64),
Bithynia and Pontus (63), Cyprus (55), Cyrenaica and Crete (63),
Numidia (46), and Mauritania (46).

Under the Emperors the following sixteen were added: Rhoetia,
Noricum, Pannonia, Moesia, Dacia, Britannia, Aegyptus, Cappadocia,
Galatia, Rhodus, Lycia, Judaea, Arabia, Mesopotamia. Armenia, and
Assyria.




CHAPTER XLV.


[Footnote: Most of the information given in this chapter is scattered
in different parts of the history; but it seems well to condense it
into one chapter for readier reference.]


ROMAN OFFICERS, ETC.

The magistrates of Rome were of two classes; the _Majores_, or
higher, and the _Minores_, or lower. The former, except the
Censor, had the _Imperium_; the latter did not. To the former
class belonged the Consuls, Praetors, and Censors, who were all
elected in the Comitia Centuriáta. The magistrates were also divided
into two other classes, viz. Curule and Non-Curule. The Curule offices
were those of Dictator, Magister Equitum, Consul, Praetor, Censor, and
Curule Aedile. These officers had the right to sit in the _sella
curúlis_, chair of state. This chair was displayed upon all public
occasions, especially in the circus and theatre; and it was the seat
of the Praetor when he administered justice. In shape it was plain,
resembling a common folding camp-stool, with crooked legs. It was
ornamented with ivory, and later overlaid with gold.

The descendants of any one who had held a curule office were nobles,
and had the right to place in their halls and to carry at funeral
processions a wax mask of this ancestor, as well as of any other
deceased members of the family of curule rank.

A person who first held a curule office, and whose ancestors had never
held one, was called a _novus homo_, i. e. a new man. The most
famous new men were Marius and Cicero.

The magistrates were chosen only from the patricians in the early
republic; but in course of time the plebeians shared these honors.
The plebeian magistrates, properly so called, were the plebeian
Aediles and the Tribúni Plebis.

All the magistrates, except the Censor, were elected for one year; and
all but the Tribunes and Quaestors began their term of office on
January 1st. The Tribune's year began December 10th; that of the
Quaestor, December 5th.

The offices, except that of Tribune, formed a gradation, through which
one must pass if he desired the consulship. The earliest age for
holding each was, for the quaestorship, twenty-seven years; for the
aedileship, thirty-seven; for the praetorship, forty; and for the
consulship, forty-three. No magistrate received any salary, and only
the wealthy could afford to hold office.


THE CONSULS.

The two Consuls were the highest magistrates, except when a Dictator
was appointed, and were the chiefs of the administration. Their power
was equal, and they had the right before all others of summoning the
Senate and the Comitia Centuriáta, in each of which they presided.
"When both Consuls were in the city, they usually took turns in
performing the official duties, each acting a month; and during this
time the Consul was always accompanied in public by twelve lictors,
who preceded him in single file, each carrying on his shoulders a
bundle of rods (_fasces_), to signify the power of the magistrate
to scourge criminals. Outside the city, these fasces showed an axe
projecting from each bundle, signifying the power of the magistrate to
behead criminals."

At the expiration of his year of office, the Consul was sent to govern
a province for one year, and was then called the _Proconsul_. He
was chief in his province in all military, civil, and criminal cases.


PRAETORS.

There were eight Praetors, whose duties were to administer justice
(judges). After the expiration of their year of office, they went, as
_Propraetors_, to govern provinces. The most important Praetor
was called _Praetor Urbánus_. He had charge of all civil suits
between Roman citizens. In the absence of both Consuls from the city,
he acted in their place. Each Praetor was attended by two lictors in
the city, and by six outside. The _Praetor Peregrínus_ had charge
of civil cases in which one or both parties were aliens. The other six
Praetors presided over the permanent criminal courts.


AEDILES.

The Aediles were four officers who had the general superintendence of
the police of the city, and the care of the public games and
buildings. Two of the Aediles were taken from the plebeians, and two,
called Curule Aediles, ranked with the higher magistrates, and might
be patricians. They were elected in the Comitia Tributa. Their
supervision of the public games gave them great opportunities for
gaining favor with the populace, who then, as now, delighted in
circuses and contests. A small sum was appropriated from the public
treasury for these games; but an Aedile usually expended much from his
own purse to make the show magnificent, and thus to gain votes for the
next office, that of Praetor. Only the very wealthy could afford to
hold this office.


QUAESTORS.

There were twenty Quaestors. Two were city treasurers at Rome, having
charge also of the archives. The others were assigned to the different
governors of the provinces, and acted as quartermasters. Through their
clerks, the two city Quaestors kept the accounts, received the taxes,
and paid out the city's money, as directed by the Senate. A Quaestor
always accompanied every Imperator (general) in the field as his
quartermaster. The elections for Quaestors were held in the Comitia
Tribúta.


TRIBUNI PLEBIS.

There were ten Tribunes, elected in the Comitia Tribúta. They were
always plebeians, and their chief power lay in their right to veto any
decree of the Senate, any law of the Comitia, and any public act of a
magistrate. Their persons were considered sacred, and no one could
hinder them in the discharge of their official duties under penalty of
death. They called together the Comitia Tribúta, and they also had
authority to convene the Senate and to preside over it. Sulla
succeeded in restricting their power; but Pompey restored it. The
Tribunes did not possess the _imperium_.


CENSORS.

There were two Censors, chosen from Ex-Consuls, and they held office
for eighteen months. They were elected once every five years, this
period being called a _lustrum_. They ranked as higher magistrates
without possessing the _imperium_. Their duties were:

(1) To take the census, i.e. register the citizens and their amount of
property, and to fill all vacancies in the Senate.
(2) To have a general oversight of the finances, like our Secretary of
the Treasury; to contract for the erecting of public buildings, and for
the making or repairing of public roads, sewers, etc.; to let out the
privilege of collecting the taxes, for five years, to the highest
bidder.[Footnote: In the intervals of the censorship, the duties under
(2) fell to the Aediles. ]
(3) To punish gross immorality by removal of the guilty parties from the
Senate, the Equites, or the tribe.


DICTATOR.

In cases of great danger the Senate called upon the Consuls to appoint
a Dictator, who should possess supreme power, but whose tenure of
office could never exceed six months. In later times Dictators were
not appointed, but Consuls were invested with the authority if it was
thought necessary. Sulla and Caesar, however, revived the office, but
changed its tenure, the latter holding it for life.


MAGISTER EQUITUM.

This was an officer appointed by the Dictator, to stand next in
authority to him, and act as a sort of Vice-Dictator.


PONTIFICES.

The priests formed a body (_collegium_) of fifteen members, at
the head of whom was the Pontifex Maximus (high priest). Their tenure
of office was for life, and they were responsible to no one in the
discharge of their duties. Their influence was necessarily very great.


IMPERIUM.

This was a power to command the armies, and to exercise judicial
functions conferred upon a magistrate (Dictator, Consul, or Praetor)
by a special law passed by the Comitia Curiáta. The _Imperium_
could be exercised only outside of the city walls (_pomoerium_),
except by special permission of the Senate for the purpose of
celebrating a triumph. The one receiving the _Imperium_ was
called IMPERATOR.


POTESTAS.

This was the power, in general, which _all_ magistrates
possessed.




CHAPTER XLVI.

HOUSES, CUSTOMS, INSTITUTIONS, ETC.


The private houses of the Romans were poor affairs until after the
conquest of the East, when money began to pour into the city. Many
houses of immense size were then erected, adorned with columns,
paintings, statues, and costly works of art. Some of these houses are
said to have cost as much as two million dollars.

The principal parts of a Roman house were the _Vestibulum_,
_Ostium_, _Atrium_, _Alae_, _Tablínum_, _Fauces_,  and _Peristylium_.
The VESTIBULUM was a court surrounded by the house on three sides,
and open on the fourth to the street. The OSTIUM corresponded in
general to our front hall. From it a door opened into the ATRIUM, which
was a large room with an opening in the centre of its roof, through which
the rain-water was carried into a cistern placed in the floor under the
opening. To the right and left of the Atrium were side rooms called the
ALAE, and the TABLÍNUM was a balcony attached to it. The passages
from the Atrium to the interior of the house were called FAUCES. The
PERISTYLIUM, towards which these passages ran, was an open court
surrounded by columns, decorated with flowers and shrubs. It was
somewhat larger than the Atrium.

The floors were covered with stone, marble, or mosaics. The walls were
lined with marble slabs, or frescoed, while the ceilings were either
bare, exposing the beams, or, in the finer houses, covered with ivory,
gold, and frescoing.

The main rooms were lighted from above; the side rooms received their
light from these, and not through windows looking into the street. The
windows of rooms in upper stories were not supplied with glass until
the time of the Empire. They were merely openings in the wall, covered
with lattice-work. To heat a room, portable stoves were generally
used, in which charcoal was burned. There were no chimneys, and the
smoke passed out through the windows or the openings in the roofs.

The rooms of the wealthy were furnished with great splendor. The walls
were frescoed with scenes from Greek mythology, landscapes, etc. In
the vestibules were fine sculptures, costly marble walls, and doors
ornamented with gold, silver, and rare shells. There were expensive
rugs from the East, and, in fact, everything that could be obtained
likely to add to the attractiveness of the room.

Candles were used in early times, but later the wealthy used lamps,
which were made of terra-cotta or bronze. They were mostly oval, flat
on the top, often with figures in relief. In them were one or more
round holes to admit the wick. They either rested on tables, or were
suspended by chains from the ceiling.


MEALS.

The meals were the JENTACULUM, PRANDIUM, and COENA. The first was our
breakfast, though served at an early hour, sometimes as early as four
o'clock. It consisted of bread, cheese, and dried fruits. The prandium
was a lunch served about noon. The coena, or dinner, served between
three and sunset, was usually of three courses. The first course
consisted of stimulants, eggs, or lettuce and olives; the second,
which was the main course, consisted of meats, fowl, or fish, with
condiments; the third course was made up of fruits, nuts, sweetmeats,
and cakes.

At elaborate dinners the guests assembled, each with his napkin and
full dress of bright colors. The shoes were removed so as not to soil
the couches. These couches usually were adapted for three guests, who
reclined, resting the head on the left hand, with the elbow supported
by pillows. The Romans took the food with their fingers. Dinner was
served in a room called the TRICLINIUM. In Nero's "Golden House," the
dining-room was constructed like a theatre, with shifting scenes to
change with every course.


DRESS.--BATHING.

The Roman men usually wore two garments, the TUNICA and TOGA. The
former was a short woollen under garment with short sleeves. To have a
long tunic with long sleeves was considered a mark of effeminacy. The
tunic was girded round the waist with a belt. The toga was peculiarly
a Roman garment, and none but citizens were allowed to wear it. It was
also the garment of peace, in distinction from the SAGUM, which was
worn by soldiers. The toga was of white wool and was nearly
semicircular, but being a cumbrous garment, it became customary in
later times to wear it only on state occasions. The poor wore only the
tunic, others wore, in place of the toga, the LACERNA, which was an
open cloak, fastened to the right shoulder by a buckle. Boys, until
about sixteen, wore a toga with a purple hem.

The women wore a TUNIC, STOLA, and PULLA. The stola was a loose
garment, gathered in and girdled at the waist with a deep flounce
extending to the feet. The pulla was a sort of shawl to throw over the
whole figure, and to be worn out of doors. The ladies indulged their
fancy for ornaments as freely as their purses would allow.

Foot-gear was mostly of two kinds, the CALCEUS and the SOLEAE. The
former was much like our shoe, and was worn in the street. The latter
were sandals, strapped to the bare foot, and worn in the house. The
poor used wooden shoes.

Bathing was popular among the wealthy. Fine buildings were erected,
with elegant decorations, and all conveniences for cold, warm, hot,
and vapor baths. These bath-houses were very numerous, and were places
of popular resort. Attached to many of them were rooms for exercise,
with seats for spectators. The usual time for bathing was just before
dinner. Upon leaving the bath, it was customary to anoint the body
with oil.


FESTIVALS, GAMES, ETC.

The SATURNALIA was the festival of Saturn, to whom the inhabitants of
Latium attributed the introduction of agriculture and the arts of
civilized life. It was celebrated near the end of December,
corresponding to our Christmas holidays, and under the Empire lasted
seven days. During its continuance no public business was transacted,
the law courts were closed, the schools had a holiday, and slaves were
relieved from all ordinary toil. All classes devoted themselves to
pleasure, and presents were interchanged among friends.

The LUPERCALIA; a festival in honor of Lupercus, the god of fertility,
was celebrated on the 15th of February. It was one of the most ancient
festivals, and was held in the Lupercal, where Romulus and Remus were
said to have been nursed by the she wolf (_lupa_). The priests of
Lupercus were called LUPERCI. They formed a collegium, but their
tenure of office is not known. On the day of the festival these
priests met at the Lupercal, offered sacrifice of goats, and took a
meal, with plenty of wine. They then cut up the skins of the goats
which they had sacrificed. With some of these they covered parts of
their bodies, and with others, they made thongs, and, holding them in
their hands, ran through the streets of Rome, striking with them all
whom they met, especially women, as it was believed this would render
them fruitful.

The QUIRINALIA was celebrated on the 17th of February, when Quirínus
(Romulus) was said to have been carried up to heaven.

Gladiators were men who fought with swords in the amphitheatre and
other places, for the amusement of the people. These shows were first
exhibited at Rome in 264 B. c., and were confined to public funerals;
but afterwards gladiators were to be seen at the funerals of most men
of rank. Under the Empire the passion for this kind of amusement
increased to such an extent, that gladiators were kept and trained in
schools (_ludi_) and their trainers were called _Lanistae_.
The person who gave an exhibition was called an EDITOR. He published
(_edere_), some time before the show, a list of the combatants.
In the show the fights began with wooden swords, but at the sound of
the trumpet these were exchanged for steel weapons. When a combatant
was wounded, if the spectators wished him spared, they held their
thumbs down, but turned them up if they wanted him killed. Gladiators
who had served a long time, were often discharged and presented with a
wooden sword (_rudis_), Hence they were called _rudiarii_.


THE AMPHITHEATRE, THEATRE, AND CIRCUS.

The AMPHITHEATRE was a place for the exhibition of gladiatorial shows,
combats of wild beasts, and naval engagements. Its shape was that of
an ellipse, surrounded by seats for the spectators. The word
Amphitheatre was first applied to a wooden building erected by Caesar.
Augustus built one of stone in the Campus Martius, but the most
celebrated amphitheatre was built by Vespasian and Titus, and
dedicated in 80 A. D. It is still standing, though partly in ruins,
covers nearly six acres, and could seat ninety thousand people. The
name given to it to-day is the COLOSSÉUM. The open space in the centre
was called the ARÉNA, and was surrounded by a wall about fifteen feet
high to protect the spectators from the wild beasts. Before the time
of Caesar the shows were held in the Forum and in the Circus.

The THEATRE was never as popular with the Romans as with the Greeks.
The plays of Plautus and Terence were acted on temporary wooden
stages. The first stone theatre was built by Pompey in 55 B. C., near
the Campus Martius. It was a fine building, with a seating capacity of
forty thousand. The seats were arranged in a semicircle, as at
present, the orchestra being reserved for the Senators and other
distinguished persons. Then came fourteen rows of seats for the
Equites, and behind these sat the ordinary crowd.

The CIRCUS MAXIMUS. between the Palatine and Aventine Hills, was built
for chariot races, boxing, and gymnastic contests. It was an immense
structure, with galleries three stories high, and a canal called
Eurípus, and it accommodated one hundred thousand spectators. In the
centre Caesar erected an obelisk one hundred and thirty-two feet high,
brought from Egypt. The seats were arranged as in the theatre. Six
kinds of games were celebrated: 1st, chariot racing; 2d, a sham-fight
between young men on horseback; 3d, a sham-fight between infantry and
cavalry; 4th, athletic sports of all kinds; 5th, fights with wild
beasts, such as lions, boars, etc.; 6th, sea fights. Water was let
into the canal to float ships. The combatants were captives, or
criminals condemned to death, who fought until one party was killed,
unless saved by the kindness of the Emperor.


A TRIUMPHAL PROCESSION.

The Imperator, when he returned from a successful campaign, was
sometimes allowed to enjoy a triumphal procession, provided he had
been Dictator, Consul, or Praetor. No one desiring a triumph ever
entered the city until the Senate decided whether or not he deserved
one. When a favorable decision was reached, the temples were all
thrown open, garlands of flowers decorated every shrine and image, and
incense smoked on every altar. The Imperator ascended the triumphal
car and entered a city gate, where he was met by the whole body of the
Senate, headed by the magistrates.

The procession then proceeded in the following order:--

1. The Senate, headed by the magistrates. 2. A troop of trumpeters. 3.
Carts laden with spoils, often very costly and numerous. 4. A body of
flute-players. 5. White bulls and oxen for sacrifice. 6. Elephants and
rare animals from the conquered countries. 7. The arms and insignia of
the leaders of the conquered enemy. 8. The leaders themselves, with
their relatives and other captives. 9. The lictors of the Imperator in
single file, their fasces wreathed with laurel. 10. The Imperator
himself, in a circular chariot drawn by four horses. He was attired in
a gold-embroidered robe, and a flowered tunic; he held a laurel bough
in his right hand, a sceptre in his left, and his brow was encircled
with a laurel wreath. 11. The grown up sons and officers of the
Imperator. 12. The whole body of infantry, with spears adorned with
laurel.

The OVATION was a sort of smaller triumph. The commander entered the
city on foot, or in later times on horseback. He was clothed in a
purple-bordered robe. His head was crowned with laurel, and a sheep
(_ovis_) was sacrificed, instead of a bull as in the case of a
triumph.


POMOERIUM.

The Pomoerium was the sacred enclosure of the city, inside of which no
person holding the _Imperium_ was allowed to enter. It did not
always run parallel to the city walls.


NAMES.

Every man in Rome had three names. The given name (_praenomen_),
as Lucius, Marcus, Gaius. The name of the gens (_nomen_), as
Cornelius, Tullius, Julius. The name of the family (_cognómen_),
as Scipio, Cicero, Caesar. To these names was sometimes added another,
the _agnomen_, given for some exploit, or to show that the person
was adopted from some other gens. Thus Scipio the elder was called
AFRICÁNUS, and all his descendants had the right to the name.
Africánus the younger was adopted from the Cornelian gens into the
Aemilian gens; therefore he added to his other names AEMILIÁNUS.

The women were called only by the name of their gens. The daughter of
Scipio was called, for example, CORNELIA, and to distinguish her from
others of the Cornelian gens she was called Cornelia daughter of
Scipio. If there were more than one daughter, to the name of the
eldest was added _prima_ (first), to that of the next, _secunda_
(second), etc.


MARRIAGE.

Intermarriage (_connubium_) between patricians and plebeians was
forbidden previous to 445, and after that the offspring of such
marriages took the rank of the father. After the parties had agreed,
to marry, and the consent of the parents or persons in authority was
given, the marriage contract was drawn up and signed by both parties.
The wedding day was then fixed upon. This could not fall upon the
Kalends, Nones, or Ides of any month, or upon any day in May or
February. The bride was dressed in a long white robe, with a bridal
veil, and shoes of a bright yellow color. She was conducted in the
evening to her future husband's home by three boys, one of whom
carried before her a torch, the other two supporting her by the arm.
They were accompanied by friends of both parties. The groom received
the bride at the door, which she entered with distaff and spindle in
hand. The keys of the house were then delivered to her. The day ended
with a feast given by the husband, after which the bride was conducted
to the bridal couch, in the atrium, which was adorned with flowers. On
the following day another feast was given by the husband, and the wife
performed certain religious rites.

The position of the Roman woman after marriage was very different from
that of the Greek. She presided over the whole household, educated her
children, watched over and preserved the honor of the house, and
shared the honors and respect shown to her husband.


FUNERALS.

When a Roman was at the point of death, his nearest relative present
endeavored to catch the last breath with his mouth. The ring was
removed from the dying person's hand, and as soon as he was dead his
eyes and mouth were closed by the nearest relative, who called upon
the deceased by name, exclaiming "Farewell!" The body was then washed,
and anointed with oil and perfumes, by slaves or undertakers. A small
coin was placed in the mouth of the body to pay the ferryman (Charon)
in Hades, and the body was laid out on a couch in the vestibulum, with
its feet toward the door. In early times all funerals were held at
night; but in later times only the poor followed this custom, mainly
because they could not afford display. The funeral, held the ninth day
after the death, was headed by musicians playing mournful strains, and
mourning women hired to lament and sing the funeral song. These were
sometimes followed by players and buffoons, one of whom represented
the character of the deceased, and imitated his words and actions.
Then came the slaves whom the deceased had liberated, each wearing the
cap of liberty. Before the body were carried the images of the dead
and of his ancestors, and also the crown and military rewards which he
had gained. The couch on which the body was carried was sometimes made
of ivory, and covered with gold and purple. Following it were the
relatives in mourning, often uttering loud lamentations, the women
beating their breasts and tearing their hair.

The procession of the most illustrious dead passed through the Forum,
and stopped before the _Rostra_, where a funeral oration was
delivered. From here the body was carried to its place of burial,
which must be outside the city. Bodies were sometimes cremated, and in
the later times of the Republic this became quite common.


EDUCATION.

In early times the education of the Romans was confined to reading,
writing, and arithmetic; but as they came in contact with the Greeks a
taste for higher education was acquired. Greek slaves (_paedagogi_)
were employed in the wealthy families to watch over the children, and
to teach them to converse in Greek.

A full course of instruction included the elementary branches
mentioned above, and a careful study of the best _Greek_ and
Latin writers, besides a course in philosophy and rhetoric, under some
well known professor abroad, usually at Athens or Rhodes.


BOOKS.--LETTER WRITING.

The most common material on which books were written was the thin rind
of the Egyptian papyrus tree. Besides the papyrus, parchment was often
used. The paper or parchment was joined together so as to form one
sheet, and was rolled on a staff, whence the name volume (from
_volvere_, to roll).

Letter writing was very common among the educated. Letters were
usually written with the _stylus_, an iron instrument like a
pencil in size and shape, on thin slips of wood or ivory covered with
wax, and folded together with the writing on the inside. The slips
were tied together by a string, and the knot was sealed with wax and
stamped with a signet ring. Letters were also written on parchment
with ink. Special messengers were employed to carry letters, as there
was no regular mail service. Roman letters differed from ours chiefly
in the opening and close. The writer always began by sending
"greeting" to the person addressed, and closed with a simple"
farewell," without any signature. Thus "Cicero S. D. Pompeio" (S. D.
= sends greeting) would be the usual opening of a letter from Cicero
to Pompey.




CHAPTER XLVII.

PUBLIC BUILDINGS, SQUARES, ETC.


_Rome_ was built on seven hills,--the Palatine, the Aventine, the
Capitoline, the Esquiline (the largest), the Quirínal, the Viminal,
and the Coelian.

There were various public squares (_forum_ = square or park).
Some were places of resort for public business, and most were adorned
with porticos. The most celebrated square was the _Forum
Románum_, or simply _The Forum_. There were also the _Forum
Caesaris_ and _Forum Trajáni_. Some served as markets; as
_Forum Boarium_, the cattle market; _Forum Suarium_, the hog
market, etc.

Temples were numerous. The _Pantheon_ (temple of all the gods),
built by Agrippa and restored by Hadrian, was dedicated to Jupiter. It
was situated outside of the city, in the Campus Martius, and is now
used as a Christian church. The Temple of Apollo Palatínus, built by
Augustus, was on the Palatine Hill. It contained a library, which was
founded by Augustus. The Temple of Aesculapius was on an island in the
Tiber; that of Concordia, on the slope of the Capitoline Hill, was
dedicated in 377 B.C., and restored by Tiberius. The Temple of Janus
was an arched passage east of the Forum, the gates of which were open
during war. Up to the time of Ovid the gates had been closed but three
times, once in Numa's reign, again at the close of the [Illustration: ROME
 AND ENVIRONS K. D. Servoss, Eng'r, N. Y.] Second Punic War, and
after the battle of Actium. Janus was one of the oldest Latin divinities,
and was represented with a face in front and another on the back of his
head. From him is named the month of January.

There were several temples of Jupiter, the most famous of which was
that of Jupiter Optimus, Maximus, or Capitolínus, built during the
dynasty of the Tarquins, and splendidly adorned. (See Chapter V.)
There were also numerous temples of Juno, of Mars, and of other
deities.

The COLOSSÉUM was the largest building in Rome.

There were three theatres; that of Pompey, of Marcellus, and of
Balbus; and several circuses, the most famous of which was the Circus
Maximus.

The BASILICAE were halls of justice (court-houses). The most important
was the Basilica Julia, begun by Caesar and finished by Augustus,
which was situated on the south side of the Forum, and the foundations
of which can still be seen.

The CURIA, or Senate-house, was in the Forum. Each of the thirty
curiae had a place of meeting, called also a curia, where were
discussed public questions pertaining to politics, finance, or
religion.

The PUBLIC BATHS were numerous. There were Thermae (hot baths) of
Nero, of Titus, of Trajan, of Caracalla, and of others, ruins of which
still exist.

Pure water was brought into the city from the surrounding hills by
fourteen different aqueducts, all of which were well built, and three
of which are still in use. The first aqueduct (Aqua Appia) was built
about 313 B.C., by Appius Claudius.

SEWERS intersected Rome in all directions, and some were of immense
size. The CLOÁCA MAXIMA, built by Tarquin, was the largest, and is
still in use. Its innermost arch has a diameter of fourteen feet.

There are said to have been twenty TRIUMPHAL ARCHES, of which five now
remain, 1. The ARCH OF DRUSUS, on the Appian Way, erected in honor of
Claudius Drusus. 2. The ARCH OF TITUS, at the foot of the Palatine
Hill, built by Titus to commemorate his conquest of Judaea, The bas-
reliefs on this arch represent the spoils taken from the temple at
Jerusalem, carried in triumphal procession. 3. The ARCH OF SEPTIMIUS
SEVERUS, built by the Senate in 207 A. D., at the end of the Via
Sacra, in honor of the Emperor and his two sons for their conquest of
the Parthians and Arabians. 4. The ARCH OF GALLIÉNUS. 5. The ARCH OF
CONSTANTINE.

There were two famous MAUSOLÉA, that of Augustus, now in ruins, and
that of Hadrian, which, stripped of its ornaments, is now the Castle
of San Angelo.

The COLUMNS commemorating persons or events were numerous. The most
remarkable of these were erected for naval victories, and called
COLUMNAE ROSTRÁTAE. The one of Duilius, in honor of the victory at
Mylae (261 B. C.), still stands. It has three ship-beaks attached to
each side. Columns were built in honor of several Emperors. That of
Trajan is perhaps best known.

The COLUMNA MILLIARIA was a milestone set up by Augustus in the Forum,
from which all distances on the different public roads were measured.
It was called _Milliarium Aureum_, or the golden milestone.




CHAPTER XLVIII.

COLONIES.--THE CALENDAR.--RELIGION.


Colonies were established by Rome throughout its whole history. They
were intended to keep in check a conquered people, and also to repress
hostile incursions. Many were founded to provide for veteran soldiers;
a practice which was begun by Sulla, and continued under the Emperors.

No colony was established without a _lex_, _plebiscítum_, or
_senatus consultum_. Religious ceremonies always accompanied
their foundation, and the anniversary was observed.

The colonies were divided into two classes, viz. Roman, and Latin or
military. Members of the former class had all the rights of Roman
citizens; those of the latter could not vote in the Comitia at Rome.
The _Latíni_, who were once Roman citizens, and who always felt
equal to them, were uneasy in their subordinate position. But by the
Julian law, passed in 90 B. C., they acquired the right of voting at
Rome, and were placed on the same footing as Roman colonists.


THE CALENDAR.

The Roman year began with March. There were twelve months, and each
month had three divisions, the KALENDS, NONES, and IDES. The Kalends
fell on the first of the month; the Nones, on the 7th of March, May,
July, and October; in other months, on the 5th. The Ides came eight
days after the Nones. If an event happened on these divisions, it was
said to occur on the Kalends, Nones, or Ides of the month. If it
happened between any of these divisions, it was said to occur so many
days _before_ the division _following_ the event. The year was
reckoned from the foundation of the city (753 B.C.), and often the
names of the Consuls of that year were added.


RELIGION.

The Romans were religious, and had numerous gods and goddesses:
JUPITER and JUNO, the god and goddess of light; SATURN, the god of
seed-sowing; TELLUS, the goddess of the nourishing earth; CERES, the
goddess of growth; CONSUS and OPS, who presided over the harvest;
PALES, the god of the flocks; and LUPERCUS, the god of fertility.
Various festivals were celebrated in honor of these, as the
Saturnalia, in December; the Tellilia (Tellus), Cerialia (Ceres), and
Palilia (Pales), in April; and the Lupercalia, in February.

VESTA was the goddess of the house, and as every family had an altar
erected for her worship, so the state, as a combination of families,
had a common altar to her in the temple of Vesta. In this temple were
also worshipped the Penátes and Lares.

The LARES were special guardians of private houses. Some protected
fields and cities. Images of Lares of diminutive size, clad often in
dog-skins, were ranged along the hearth. The people honored them on
the Kalends of May and other festival days by decking them with
flowers, and by offering them wine, incense, flour, and portions of
their meals upon plates.

The PENÁTES were kept and worshipped only in the inmost chambers of
houses and temples. Their statues, made of wax, wood, or ivory, were
also kept in the inner hall.

The priestesses of Vesta were six in number, and were called VESTAL
VIRGINS. When a vestal was to be elected, the Pontifex Maximus chose
twenty young girls from high families. Of these one was chosen by lot
to fill the vacancy, and she was bound to serve for thirty years. The
Vestals were preceded by a lictor when in public. They had private
seats in the public shows, and had the power of delivering from
punishment any condemned person they happened to meet. They wore white
dresses and white fillets. Their chief duty was to keep the fire
always burning on the hearth (_focus publicus_) in the temple.
They could not marry.


FLAMINES.

The FLAMINES were priests devoted to the service of some particular
god. There were fifteen, and they were chosen first in the Comitia
Curiáta, and afterwards probably in the Tributa. The most
distinguished of all the Flamines was the FLAMEN DIÁLIS (Jupiter). He
had the right to a lictor, to the _sella curulis_, and to a seat
in the Senate. If one in bonds took refuge in his house, the chains
were at once removed. This priest, however, could not be away from the
city a single night, and was forbidden to sleep out of his own bed for
three consecutive nights. He was not allowed to mount a horse, or even
to touch one, or to look upon an army outside of the city walls.


THE SALII.

These were priests of Mars, twelve in number, and always chosen from
the patricians. They celebrated the festival of Mars on the 1st of
March, and for several successive days.


THE AUGURES.

This body varied in number, from three, in early times, to sixteen in
the time of Caesar. It was composed of men who were believed to
interpret the will of the gods, and to declare whether the omens were
favorable or otherwise. No public act of any kind could be performed,
no election held, no law passed, no war waged, without first
consulting the omens. There was no appeal from the decision of the
Augurs, and hence their power was great. They held office for life,
and were a close corporation, filling their own vacancies until 103 B.
C.


THE FETIALES.

This was another body of priests holding office for life, and
numbering probably twenty. They were expected, whenever any dispute
arose with other nations, to demand satisfaction, to determine whether
hostilities should be begun, and to preside at any ratification of
peace.




CHAPTER XLIX.

THE ROMAN ARMY IN CAESAR'S TIME.


The LEGIO was composed of infantry, and, though larger, corresponded
to our regiment. It was divided into ten cohorts (battalions), each
cohort into three maniples (companies), and each maniple into two
centuries (platoons). In theory the number in each legion was six
thousand, in practice about four thousand. The usual order of battle
was to draw up each legion in three lines (_acies_ triplex), the
first consisting of four cohorts, the second and third of three each.
The defensive armor of the legionary soldier was a helmet of metal or
leather, a shield (four feet by two and a half), greaves, and
corselets of various material. The outer garment was a woollen
blanket, fastened to the shoulders by a buckle. Higher officers wore a
long purple cloak. The offensive armor was a short, straight two-edged
sword (_gladius_), about two feet long, worn by privates on the
right side, so as not to interfere with the shield, but on the left
side by officers. The javelin (_pilum_) was a heavy wooden shaft
with an iron head, the whole about seven feet long and weighing fully
ten pounds. All legionary soldiers were Roman citizens. The
auxiliaries were hired or drafted troops, and were always light-armed.
The cavalry in Caesar's time was made up of auxiliaries taken from the
different provinces.

The officers were:--
1. The IMPERATOR, or commander in chief.
2. The LEGÁTI, or staff officers, varying in number. Caesar had ten.
3. The QUAESTOR, or quartermaster.
4. The TRIBÚNI MILITUM, numbering six in each legion, and assisting
   the Imperator in his duties.
5. The PRAEFECTI, who held various subordinate commands.
6. The CENTURIÓNES, who were non-commissioned officers, and rose in
rank for good service. There were sixty centurions in each legion, six
in each cohort, and one in each century. They were promoted from the
ranks, but rarely rose above centurion of the first rank. All the
officers, except the centurions, came from either senatorial or
equestrian families.

The COHORS PRAETORIA was a body of picked troops that acted as body
guard to the Imperator.

The STANDARD (_signum_) of the legion was an eagle with
outstretched wings, perched upon a pole.

The Romans when on the march fortified their camp every night. They
made it rectangular in shape, and threw up fortifications always in
the same way. It was surrounded by a ditch and rampart. The legionary
soldiers encamped next to the wall on the inside of the
fortifications, thus surrounding the cavalry, the auxiliaries, the
general and his staff. The general's tent was called the
_Praetorium_, and the entrance to the camp in front of his tent
was called the Praetorian Gate. The opposite entrance was called the
Decuman Gate.




CHAPTER L.

LEGENDARY ROME.


AENEAS, son of Anchíses and Venus, fled from Troy after its capture by
the Greeks (1184?) and came to Italy. He was accompanied by his son
IÚLUS and a number of brave followers. LATÍNUS, who was king of the
district where Aenéas landed, received him kindly, and gave him his
daughter, LAVINIA, in marriage. Aenéas founded a city, which he named
LAVINIUM, in honor of his wife. After his death, Iúlus, also called
ASCANIUS, became king. He founded on Mount Albánus a city, which he
called ALBA LONGA, and to it transferred the capital.

Here a number of kings ruled in succession, the last of whom was
SILVIUS PROCAS, who left two sons, NUMITOR, the older, and AMULIUS.
They divided the kingdom, the former choosing the property, the latter
the crown. Numitor had two children, a son and a daughter. Amulius,
fearing that they might aspire to the throne, murdered the son, and
made the daughter, RHEA SILVIA, a Vestal virgin. This he did to
prevent her marrying, for this was forbidden to Vestal virgins. She,
however, became pregnant by Mars, and had twin sons, whom she named
ROMULUS and REMUS. When Amulius was informed of this, he cast their
mother into prison, and ordered the boys to be drowned in the Tiber.

At this time the river was swollen by rains, and had overflowed its
banks. The boys were thrown into a shallow place, escaped drowning,
and, the water subsiding, they were left on dry land. A she wolf,
hearing their cries, ran to them and suckled them. FAUSTULUS, a
shepherd who was near by, seeing this, took the boys home and reared
them. When they grew up and learned who they were, they killed
Amulius, and gave the kingdom to their grandfather, Numitor. Then
(753) they founded a city on Mount Palatínus, which they called ROME,
after Romulus. While they were building a wall around this city, Remus
was killed in a quarrel with his brother.

Romulus, first king of Rome, ruled for thirty-seven years (753-716).
He found the city needed inhabitants, and to increase their number he
opened an asylum, to which many refugees fled. But wives were needed.
To supply this want, he celebrated games, and invited the neighboring
people, the SABINES, to attend the sports. When all were engaged in
looking on, the Romans suddenly made a rush and seized the Sabine
virgins. This bold robbery caused a war, which finally ended in a
compromise, and a sharing of the city with the Sabines. Romulus then
chose one hundred Senators, whom he called PATRES. He also divided the
people into thirty wards. In the thirty-seventh year of his reign he
disappeared, and was believed to have been taken up into heaven.

One year followed without any king, and then NUMA POMPILIUS(716-673),
a Sabine from Cures, was chosen. He was a good man, and a great
lawgiver. Many sacred rites were instituted by him to civilize his
barbarous subjects. He reformed the calendar, and built a temple to
the god Janus. TULLUS HOSTILIUS(673-641) succeeded him. His reign was
noted for the fall of Alba Longa. Then came ANCUS MARCIUS (640-616),
the grandson of Numa. He was a good ruler and popular. He conquered
the Latins, enlarged the city, and built new walls around it. He was
the first to build a prison, and to bridge the Tiber. [Footnote: This
bridge was called the _pons sublicius_ i. e. a bridge resting on
piles.] He also founded a city at its mouth, which he called OSTIA.

The next three kings were of Etruscan origin. LUCIUS TARQUINIUS
PRISCUS (616-578) went to Rome first during the reign of Ancus, and,
becoming a favorite of his, was appointed guardian of his sons. After
the death of Ancus, he wrested the government from them, and became
king himself. He increased the Senators to two hundred, carried on
many wars successfully, and thus enlarged the territory of the city.
He built the CLOÁCA MAXIMA, or great sewer, which is used to-day.
Tarquin also began the temple of JUPITER CAPITOLÍNUS, on the
Capitoline Hill. He was killed in the thirty-eighth year of his reign
by the sons of Ancus, from whom he had snatched the kingdom.

His successor was his son-in-law, SERVIUS TULLIUS (578-534), who
enlarged the city still more, built a temple to Diána, and took a
census of the people. It was found that the city and suburbs contained
83,000 souls. Servius was killed by his daughter, Tullia, and her
husband, Tarquinius Superbus, son of Priscus.

TARQUINIUS SUPERBUS succeeded to the throne (534-510). He was
energetic in war, and conquered many neighboring places, among which
was Ardea, a city of the Rutuli. He finished the temple of Jupiter,
begun by his father. He also obtained the SIBYLLINE BOOKS. A woman
from Cumae, a Greek colony, came to him, and offered for sale nine
books of oracles and prophecies; but the price seemed exorbitant, and
he refused to purchase them. The sibyl then burned three, and,
returning, asked the same price for the remaining six. The king again
refused. She burned three more, and obtained from the monarch for her
last three the original price. These books were preserved in the
Capitol, and held in great respect. They were destroyed with the
temple by fire, on July 6, 83. Two men had charge of them, who were
called _duoviri sacrórum_. The worship of the Greek deities,
Apollo and Latóna, among others, was introduced through these books.

In 510 a conspiracy was formed against Tarquin by BRUTUS, COLLATÍNUS,
and others, and the gates of the city were closed against him.
[Footnote: The cause of the conspiracy was the violence offered by
Sextus, Tarquin's son, to Lucretia, wife of Collatínus. Unable to bear
the humiliation, she killed herself in the presence of her family,
having first appealed to them to avenge her wrongs] A Republic was
then formed, with two Consuls at the head of the government.

Tarquin made three attempts to recover his power at Rome, all
unsuccessful. [Footnote: The victory of Lake Regillus, which has been
painted by Macaulay in glowing colors, was gained over Tarquin in
509.] In the last attempt (508), he was assisted by PORSENA, king of
the Etruscans. They advanced against the city from the north. HORATIUS
COCLES, a brave young man, alone defended the bridge (_pans
sublicius_) over the Tiber until it was torn down behind him. He
then swam the river in safety to his friends. [Footnote: See
Macaulay's "Lays of Ancient Rome."]

During the siege of the city, QUINTUS MUCIUS SCAEVOLA, a courageous
youth, stole into the camp of the enemy with the intention of killing
King Porsena, but by mistake killed his secretary instead. He was
seized and carried to Porsena, who tried to frighten him by threats of
burning. Instead of replying, Scaevola held his right hand on the
burning altar until it was consumed. The king, admiring this heroic
act, pardoned him. Out of gratitude, Scaevola told the king that three
hundred other men as brave as himself had sworn to kill him. Porsena
was so alarmed, that he made peace, and withdrew from the city. Mucius
received his name Scaevola (left-handed) on account of this loss of
his right hand.

Tarquin went to Tusculum, where he spent the rest of his days in
retirement.

In 494 the plebeians at Rome rebelled, because they were exhausted by
taxes and military service. A large part of them left the city, and
crossed the Anio to a mountain (Mons Sacer) near by. The Senate sent
MENENIUS AGRIPPA to treat with them. By his exertions [Footnote:
Menenius is said to have related for them the famous fable of the
belly and members.] the people were induced to return to the city, and
for the first time were allowed to have officers chosen from their own
ranks to represent their interests. These officers were called Tribúni
Plebis.

Two years later (492) Gaius Marcius, one of the patricians, met and
defeated the Volsci, a neighboring tribe, at CORIOLI. For this he
received the name of CORIOLÁNUS. During a famine, he advised that
grain should not be distributed to the plebeians unless they
relinquished their right to choose the Tribúni Plebis. For this he was
banished. Having obtained command of a Volscian army, he marched
against Rome, and came within five miles of the city. Here he was met
by a deputation of his own citizens, who begged him to spare the city.
He refused; but, when his wife and mother added their tears, he was
induced to withdraw the army. He was afterwards killed by the
Volscians as a traitor. [Footnote: See Shakespeare's "Coriolanus."]

After the expulsion of Tarquin, the FABII were among the most
distinguished men at Rome. There were three brothers, and for seven
consecutive years one of them was Consul. It looked as if the Fabian
gens would get control of the government. The state took alarm, and
the whole gens, numbering 306 males and 4,000 dependents, was driven
from Rome. For two years they carried on war alone against the
Veientes, but finally were surprised and slain (477). One boy, Quintus
Fabius Vibulánus, alone survived to preserve the name and gens of the
Fabii.

In 458 the Romans were hard pressed by the Aequi. Their territory had
been overrun, and their Consuls, cut off in some defiles, were in
imminent danger of destruction. LUCIUS QUINCTUS CINCINNÁTUS was
appointed Dictator. He was one of the most noted Roman warriors of
this period. The ambassadors sent to inform him of his appointment
found him working with bare arms in his field. Cincinnátus told his
wife to throw over him his mantle, that he might receive the
messengers of the state with proper respect. Such was the simplicity
of his character, and yet so deeply did he reverence authority. The
Aequi could not withstand his vigorous campaign, but were obliged soon
to surrender, and made to pass under the yoke as a sign of
humiliation. The Dictator enjoyed a well earned triumph.

In 451 one of the Decemviri, APPIUS CLAUDIUS, was captivated by the
beauty of a patrician maiden, VIRGINIA, [Footnote: See Macaulay's
"Lays of Ancient Rome."] a daughter of Lucius Virginius, and the
betrothed of Lucius Icilius. He formed, with one of his tools, an
infamous plot to obtain possession of Virginia, under pretence that
she was a slave. When, in spite of all the efforts of the girl's
father and lover, the Decemvir had, in his official capacity, adjudged
her to be the slave of his tool, Virginius plunged a knife into his
daughter's bosom, in presence of the people in the Forum. The enraged
populace compelled the Decemviri to resign, and Appius, to escape
worse punishment, put an end to his own life.

MARCUS FURIUS CAMILLUS was a famous man of a little later period. He
was called a second Romulus for his distinguished services. In 396 he
captured Veii, after a siege of ten years. On his return he celebrated
the most magnificent triumph yet seen at Rome. He was afterwards
impeached for not having fairly divided the spoils obtained at Veii,
and went into exile at Ardea. When Rome was besieged by the Gauls
under Brennus, in 390, Camillus was recalled and made Dictator. At the
head of forty thousand men he hastened to the city, raised the siege,
and in the battle which followed annihilated the Gauls. He was
Dictator five times, Interrex three times, Military Tribune twice, and
enjoyed four triumphs. He died at the advanced age of eighty-eight.

BRENNUS was the famous leader of the Senones, a tribe of Gauls, who
invaded Italy about 390. He defeated the Romans at the River Allia
(July 18, 390), and captured the city, except the Capitol, which he
besieged for six months.

 During the siege he tried to surprise the garrison, but was repulsed
by Manlius, who was awakened by the cackling of some geese. Peace was
finally purchased by the Romans by the payment of a thousand pounds of
gold. To increase the weight, Brennus is said to have thrown his sword
on the scales. At this juncture, as the story runs, Camillus appeared
with his troops, ordered the gold to be removed, saying that Rome must
be ransomed with steel, and not gold. In the battle which followed,
the Gauls were defeated.




CHRONOLOGY.

[The dates previous to 389 B.C. are uncertain.]

B.C.
753.     Foundation of Rome by Romulus.
753-510. REGAL PERIOD.
753-716. Romulus.
716-673. Numa Pompilius.
673-641. Tullus Hostilius.
640-616. Ancus Marcius.
616-578. Tarquinius Priscus.
578-534. Servius Tullius.
534-510. Tarquinius Superbus.
510-30.  THE REPUBLIC.
509.     Battle of Lake Regillus.
508.     Porsena. Horatius Codes.
494.     Tribúni Plebis. Menenius Agrippa.
492.     Corioli. Coriolánus.
477.     Destruction of the Fabian Gens.
458.     War with the Aequians. Cincinnátus.
451.     The Decemviri. Appius Claudius. Virginia.
396.     Capture of Veil. Camillus.
390.     Siege of Rome by Brennus. Battle at the Allia river (July 18).
387.     The planting of the first military or Latin colonies.
367.     The Licinian Rogations.
353.     Caere: the first Municipium.
343-341. First Samnite War.
340-338. The Latin War.
338.     Antium, the first Roman or maritime colony.
326-304, The Second Samnite War.
321.     The Caudine Forks.
298-290. The Third Samnite War.
295.     Sentínum.
283.     Lake Vadimónis.
281-272. Pyrrhus.
280.     Heracléa. Cineas.
279.     Asculum.
274.     Beneventum.
272.     Rome mistress of Italy; morality at its height.
264.     Period of foreign conquest begins.
264-241. First Punic War.
260.     Lipara; Mylae.
257.     Tyndaris.
256.     Ecnomus. Regulus at Clupea.
249.     Drepana.
241.     Aegátes Insulae. Catulus. Hamilcar Barca.
237.     Sardinia and Corsica acquired, and provincial system established.
229.     Illyrican War. Important results.
222.     Gallia Cisalpína acquired by battle of Telamon.
220.     Hannibal in Spain.
219.     Saguntum.
218-202. Second Punic War.
218.     Ticinus. Trebia.
217.     Trasiménus. Casilínum.
216.     Cannae.
212.     Capture of Syracuse. Archimédes.
207.     Baecula. Metaurus.
202.     Zama.
214-205. First Macedonian War.
200-197. Second Macedonian War.
198.     Cynoscephalae.
190.     Magnesia.
183.     Death of Africánus, Hannibal, and Philopoemen.
171-168. Third Macedonian War.
168.     Pydna.
149-146. Third Punic War.
149.,    Death of Cato the elder.
146.     Destruction of Carthage and Corinth.
143-133. The Numantine War.
134-132. The Servile War.
133.     Tiberius Gracchus.
129.     Death of Africánus the younger.
123-121. Gaius Gracchus.
118-104. The Jugurthine War. Metellus. Marius. Sulla.
102.     Aquae Sextiae.
101.     Vercellae.
90-89.   The Italian or Social War.
86.      Death of Marius.
86-84.   Sulla's campaign against Mithradátes.
84.      Death of Cinna.
80.      Reforms of Sulla.
78.      Death of Sulla.
80-72.   Sertorius in Spain.
73-71.   Spartacus.
72-67.   Campaign of Lucullus against Mithradátes.
67.      Pompey conquers the pirates.
67-61.   Pompey in the East.
63.      Cicero Consul. Catiline.
59.      First Triumvirate formed. Caesar's first Consulship.
59.      The Leges Juliae. Clodius. Cicero's banishment.
         Cato sent to Cyprus.
58-49.   Caesar in Gaul.
57.      Recall of Cicero. Return of Cato.
53.      Death of Crassus.
         Murder of Clodius. Pompey's consulship and
52       separation from Caesar.
49.      Caesar crosses the Rubicon.
49.      Siege and capture of Ilerda.
48 (Jan. 4). Caesar sails from Brundisium.
48.          Victory of Pompey near the sea-board.
48 (Aug. 9). Pharsalia. (Sept 28) Murder of Pompey.
             Caesar establishes Cleopatra on the throne of Egypt.
47.          Battle of Zela.
47 (Sept.).  Caesar returns to Rome.
46 (Apr. 4). Thapsus. Death of Cato the younger.
45 (Mar. 17). Munda.
44 (Mar. 15). Murder of Caesar.
43 (Nov. 27). The Second Triumvirate.
43 (Dec.)     Murder of Cicero.
42 (Nov.).    Philippi.
36.           Naulochus.
31 (Sept. 2). Actium.

THE EMPIRE.

B.C. / A.D.
30-41. THE JULIAN EMPERORS.
30-14. Augustus.

A.D.
14-37.     Tiberius.
37-41.     Caligula.
41-68.     THE CLAUDIAN EMPERORS.
41-54.     Claudius.
54-68.     Nero.
68-69.     Galba.
69.        Otho.
69-96.     THE FLAVIAN EMPERORS.
69-79.     Vespasian.
79.        Destruction of Jerusalem.
79-81.     Titus.
80.        Destruction of Herculaneum and Pompeii.
81-96.     Domitian.
96-180.    THE FIVE GOOD EMPERORS.
96-98.     Nerva.
98-117.    Trajan. Limit of Empire reached.
117-138.   Hadrian.
138-161.   Antonínus Pius.
161-180.   Marcus Aurelius.
180-192.   Commodus.
192-284.   From Pertinax to Diocletian.
284-305.   Diocletian.
306-337.   Constantine the Great.
312.       Edict of Milan.
325.       Council of Nice.
337-476.   From Constantine to Romulus Augustulus.




SPECIMEN EXAMINATION PAPERS.

HARVARD COLLEGE.

JUNE, 1889.

1. Place or explain the following: Capua; Numidia; Veii; Pharsálus;
Comitia Centuriata; Decemvir; law of Majestas. With what important
events was each connected? [Omit one; answer very briefly.]

2. The campaigns of Pyrrhus in Italy.

3. The causes and results of the Samnite Wars.

4. Cato's efforts to reform the government of Rome.

5. (_a_) Education in Rome. (_b_) Amusements at Rome.
[Take one]

1888.

1. Basilica; Lex Publilia; Patrician; Triumvir; Tribune; Roman
citizen,--what were they? [Take four.]

2. (_a_) How did Augustus obtain his power? (_b_)
The reign of Hadrian; (_c_) The first Punic war. [Take one.]

3. (_a_) The Roman religion; (_b_) Decay of the Empire,
[Take one]

4. Sulla's rule in Rome.

5. The tribes at the time of the Second Punic War. [4 and 5
are for "additional readings."]




1887.

(a) [Take five.] The Allia, Agrigentum, Lilybaeum, Placentia, Cannae,
Numantia, Massilia,-where? Mention (with dates) historical events
connected with four of these places. [Take any two.]

1. How were the members of the Roman Senate chosen at different times?

2. The origin of the Praetorship. What were the duties of the Praetor?

3. Describe or explain any five: Pater Patratus, Feriae Latinae,
Curia, Equites, Flamines, the Licinian Laws, the law of Majestas.

_Questions on the "additional reading."_

[Candidates who have read the books recommended for additional reading
may substitute one of the following questions for one of the first
three in this group.]

4. [TIGHE.] How did the practical powers of the Roman Senate differ
from its theoretical powers?

5. [BEESLEY.] What can be said in defence of the Lex Frumentaria of
Gaius Gracchus?

September, 1886.

1. Give an account of the races which inhabited Italy before the
founding of Rome.

2. What were the principal Greek colonies on the shores of the
Mediterranean? For what were three of them celebrated?

3. Describe the three forms of the Roman _comitia_, and trace
the development of the _comitia tributa_.

4. What were some causes of the victory of Rome in the Punic wars?
The effect of this victory upon Italy?

5. Explain _patria potestas_, _princeps senatus_,
_municipium_, _ager Romanus_, _equites_.




YALE COLLEGE.

EXAMINATION FOR ADMISSION.

June, 1889.

1. The Patricians and Plebeians: first causes of strife between them.
Steps in the political progress of the Plebeians. Censors. Tribunes.
Licinian Laws.

2. Greek influences on Roman life: what were they? In what ways and at
what times introduced?

3. The Second Punic War: its causes. Hannibal's great march. Battles
in Italy. Hasdrubal. Transference of the war. The result. Why did
Hannibal fail?

4. Give some account of the members of the First Triumvirate.

5. Arrange in chronological order, with dates: Actium. The Gracchi.
First Samnite War. Pharsálus Regulus. Teutones and Cimbri. Numantia.
Capture of Rome by the Gauls. Cicero's first oration against Catiline.


1887.

[Time allowed, 30 minutes.]

1. What powers did Octavianus Augustus take to himself? What change
did he make in the government of Rome? What changes did Constantine
make?

2. The gradual extension of the right of Roman citizenship, the
causes of each extension, and dates.

3. What were the possessions of Rome at the beginning of the Christian
era? How were they acquired, and when?

4. Explain _praetorian guards; provincia; colonia; tribunus plebis;
comitia centuriata_.

5. _Allia, Beneventum, Saguntum, Metaurus, Pharsalia;_ where were
they? what happened there, and when?


1886.

1. Describe the circumstances under which the tribunate was
established.

2. When and where did the principal military events in the war between
the Caesarians and Pompeians occur?

3. Sketch briefly the career of Pompeius.

4. What persons composed the Second Triumvirate? In what essential
points did the Second Triumvirate differ from the First?

5. When and for what reasons was the right of citizenship given to the
provinces?

6. What radical changes in the government were made by Diocletian?


June, 1885.

1. Give an account of the Second Punic War (with dates).

2. Explain _tribunus plebis, censor, dictator, imperator_.

3. How were the provinces governed under the Republic, and how under
the Empire?

4. What were the causes of the Social War, and what the results?

5. When and where did the following events take place: the defeat of
Varus; the first Roman naval victory; the decisive victory over
Pyrrhus; the death of Brutus and Cassius; the conquest of the first
Roman province?




UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK.

35TH ACADEMIC EXAMINATION  November 22, 1889.--Time, 9.30 A.M. to
12 M., only.  48 _credits; necessary to pass_, 36.

1. Mention two prominent characteristics of the Roman people. (2)

2. Mention one element which Rome has contributed to the civilization
of the world. (1)

3. Mention two foreign enemies that fought Rome on Italian soil; state
the result in each contest. (4)

4. Describe the situation of any two of the following places, and
state an important historical event connected with each: Caudine
Forks; Pharsalia; Pompeii; Cannae. (4)

5. Which occurred first: (1) Fall of Carthage, or captivity of
Jugurtha; (2) Battle of Actium, or battle of Philippi; (3) Death of
Antony, or death of Cicero? (3)

6. What do you understand by a "proscription"? Mention the two which
occur in Roman history. (3)

7. What were gladiators? who was their leader when they rebelled? (2)

8. What notable service was rendered to his country by Camillus;
Tiberius Gracchus; Marius; Cicero? (4)

9. Mention two laws that are landmarks in Roman history. (2)

10. Give the boundaries of the Roman Empire at the beginning of the
Christian era. (3)

11. Briefly describe the system of slavery as it existed in Rome.(2)

12. What was the Haruspex? how did he determine future events? (2)

13. Was the Roman government usually tolerant of religion? on what
ground were the Christians punished? (2)

14. Describe the way in which the Romans attacked fortified towns.
Describe two engines used by them for this purpose.(3)

15. Whence did Rome derive literature and art? (2)


THE LIFE AND PUBLIC SERVICES OF CORNELIUS SULLA.

16. To which of the two great parties in Rome did Sulla belong? (1)

17. Tell something of the reforms which he instituted. (2)

18. Mention two wars in which Sulla was engaged. (2)

19. Briefly describe his dictatorship and how it came to an end. (2)

20. Give a sketch of the character of Sulla. (2)


34TH ACADEMIC EXAMINATION.

June 14, 1889.--Time, 9 30 A.M. to 12 M., only.

48 _credits; necessary to pass,_ 36.

1. Give a brief account of any two races which inhabited Italy before
the founding of Rome.(2)

2. On how many hills was Rome built? Give the names of three of them. (4)

3. Narrate the circumstances under which the Tribunes were first
elected. (1)

4. What were the "public lands"? what political question arose in
connection with them? (2)

5. What king of Epirus made war on the Romans? Why? What grounds had
he for hoping to succeed? (3)

6. Mention two reasons why Hannibal hoped to overcome Rome. Why did he
fail? (3)

7. What importance in Roman history is attached to the following
dates: B.C. 55, 44, 42? (3)

8. Briefly describe the political situation when Caesar crossed the
Rubicon. What were the chief consequences of his act? what was "the
Rubicon"? (3)

9. What power was intrusted to a Roman Dictator? Mention two instances
of this. (3)

10. Give the names of the Flavian Emperors, with some account of one
of them. (4)

11. What radical change in the Roman government was made by
Diocletian? (1)

12. Give a brief description of Julian the Apostate; tell why he was
so called. (2)

13. Mention three objects which a Roman would be sure to point out to
a stranger visiting Rome at the time of the Emperor Titus.(3)

14. Mention any three writers of the Augustan age, and the character
of the writings of each. (6)

15. Mention two principal causes which contributed to the downfall of
Rome. (2)


THE LIFE AND PUBLIC SERVICES OF CAIUS MARIUS.

16. To what class of the people did Marius belong? (1)

17. In what war did he first gain great distinction? (1)

18. By the defeat of what peoples did he gain the title of "Saviour
of his Country"? (1)

19. How many times was Marius elected Consul? (1)

20. What prolonged struggle had its beginning in the quarrels of
Marius and Sulla? what was the result to the Republic? (2)


33d ACADEMIC EXAMINATION.

March 8, 1889.--Time, 9.30 A M. to 12 M., only.

44 _credits; necessary to pass_, 33.

1. What was the early form of government in Rome? (1)

2. Tell what you know about the (_a_) Patricians, (_b_)
Plebeians, (_c_) Tribune, (_d_) Consul. (4)

3. Give a brief account of the origin of the Comitia Tributa. (2)

4. What was meant by an Agrarian law? who secured the first one? (2)

5. Who compiled the laws of the Twelve Tables? (2)

6. Tell briefly the story of Cincinnatus. (2)

7. Describe the system of Roman roads, and tell something of their
effect upon the Republic. (2)

8. Give the immediate cause of the First Punic War. What was its
result? (2)

9. Give the name of Rome's first province. (1)

10. In what battle did the Romans finally overthrow Macedonia? What
Roman general commanded in this battle? (2)

11. Briefly describe the siege of Numantia. (2)

12. What was the effect of their great conquests upon the character of
the Roman people? (2)

13. What was the cause of the Social War? Give the result of this
war. (2)

14. Describe the campaign of Pompey against the pirates, giving the
cause of the campaign, its length, and the result. (3)

15. What great religious event occurred during the reign of the
Emperor Augustus? (1)

16. For what were the following men noted: (_a_) Juvenal,
(_b_) Seneca, (_c_) Cato the Censor, (_d_) Fabius,
(_e_) Caligula? (5)


THE GRACCHI.

17. Of what great movement did the agitations of the Gracchi form a
part? (1)

18. What measure was proposed by Tiberius Gracchus? what measure by
Caius Gracchus? (2)

19. Briefly describe the death of each of the Gracchi. (2)

20. With which order of the Roman people were the Gracchi allied by
birth? with which, by sympathy? (2)

21. Why was the failure of the agitation of the Gracchi of very great
significance? (2)


31st Advanced Academic Examination,

June 15, 1888.--Time, 9.30 A. M. to 12 M., only.

48 _credits; necessary to pass_, 36.

1. Into what three principal classes (or races) may the inhabitants of
Italy be divided? To what great race did they belong? (4)

2. Who established the _comitia centuriata_? How did it differ
from the _comitia curiata_? (2)

3. Who made the first code of Roman law? (1)

4. What king aided the Greek colonies in their war with Rome? What was
the result of the war? (2)

5. In what war was Syracuse taken by the Romans? What was the cause of
the siege? Give the name of a famous man who was slain, and state the
circumstances of his death. (4)

6. Mention five provinces gained by Rome during the period of
conquest, 266-133 B.C. (5)

7. Give the effects upon Rome of the Eastern conquests, in regard to
literature and morals. (2)

8. What political parties did Marius and Sulla represent? (2)

9. What two foreign wars were conducted by Marius. (2)

10. What was the decisive battle in the civil war between Pompey and
Caesar? (1)

11. Who formed the Second Triumvirate? What illustrious man was slain
in their proscription? (4)

12. To what one of the Caesars was Seneca tutor? (1)

13. In whose reign occurred the last great persecution of the
Christians? (1)

14. Give a brief sketch of the life and character of Constantine? (3)

15. Who was the last Western Roman Emperor? (1)


THE SAMNITE WARS, AND THE RELATIONS OF ROME TO SUBJECT STATES.

16. What caused Rome to bring the First Samnite War to an end? (1)

17. Give a brief account of the battle of the Caudine Forks, and of
the treaty made there. (4)

18. What was the result of the battle of Sentinum? Give the terms of
the final peace between the Romans and the Samnites. (3)

19. In the Roman State what three rights did Rome reserve for
herself? (3)

20. Distinguish between _Roman citizens_ and _subjects_
(_or Latins_) (2)


30TH ADVANCED ACADEMIC EXAMINATION.

March 2, 1888.--Time, 9.30 A.M. to 12 M., only.

48 _credits; necessary to pass,_ 36.

1. Draw an outline map of Italy, and upon it indicate the location of
Rome and sketch the river Tiber and the outline of Latium (6)

2. When was the Republic established, and who were the first
Consuls? (3)

3. What was the cause of the first Secession, and what were the two
conditions of the return? (3)

4. Give an account of the appointment of the Decemvirs and the powers
intrusted to them. (2)

5. Mention two provisions of the Licinian laws or rogations. (2)

6. What part of Italy did the Samnites possess, and what was the cause
of the First Samnite War? (2)

7. Give the name of one of the Roman military roads, tell in which
direction it led, and what towns were at its extremities. (3)

8. In what locality were most of the contests of the First Punic
War? (1)


ANCIENT ROME.

9. Mention one Roman and one Carthaginian general noted in the conduct
of the First Punic War. (2)

10. Describe the battle of Cannae, and tell the result of the
battle.(2)

11. Mention two reforms or measures favored by the Gracchi.(2)

12. Compare the character of Marius with that of Sulla.(2)

13. Who formed the First Triumvirate, and what element of strength did
each contribute to it? (3)

14. What cause was assigned for the assassination of Caesar? (1)

15. Describe in a sentence the character of each of the following:
Nero; Trajan. (2)


THE EARLY HISTORY OF ROME.

16. Into what two principal branches were the early Italians divided,
and what part of Italy did they occupy? (3)

17. Tell briefly the traditional story of the founding of Rome. (2)

18. What was the first form of government at Rome, and after what was
it modelled? (2)

19. How did the Senate differ from the Comitia Curiata in its
membership? (2)

20. What authority did the king have, and what duties did the Senate
perform? (2)

21. Describe the religion of the early Romans. (1)


_29th Advanced Academic Examination._

November 18, 1887.--Time, 9.30 A.M. to 12 M., only.

_48 credits; necessary to pass, 36._

1. When was Rome founded? (1)

2. Under what king was the constitution remodelled, and what was the
basis of the new constitution? (2)

3. Who was the last king? By whom was the government by kings
overturned, and to whom was the power then intrusted? (3)

4. What caused the struggle between the patricians and plebeians, how
long did it continue, and how did it result? (3)

5. Give briefly the story of Coriolanus (2)

6. What induced the Gauls to invade Italy 390 B.C., where did they
contend with the Roman army, and with what result? (3)

7. Where was Carthage, by what means did it attain its power and
wealth, and when did the Romans and Carthaginians first contend in
arms? (3)

8. Under what circumstances was Fabius sent against Hannibal, what
policy did he pursue, and with what result? (3)

9. Compare Publius Scipio Africanus with Marcus Cato in character and
habits. (2)

10. What was the object of Catiline's conspiracy, by what Consul was
it defeated, and in what manner? (3)

11. What causes led to the formation of the First Triumvirate? (1)

12. What was the cause of the battle of Actium, and what was its
result? (2)

13. Describe the manner in which Octavius Augustus became Emperor,
and the character of his reign. (2)

14. By what Emperor was Jerusalem captured, and in what year? (2)

15. Describe the customs of the Romans at meals, and mention some
articles used by them for food. (2)


THE GEOGRAPHY OF ITALY, AND ITS EARLY INHABITANTS.

16. Draw a map of Italy, and upon it sketch the Apennine mountains,
and the rivers Tiber and Arno. (4)

17. Upon the map indicate the location of the following: Rome,
Naples, Tarentum. (3)

18. What three races occupied Italy in the earliest known times, what
part of Italy did each occupy, and from which of these were the Latins
descended? (7)




INDEX.

Achaeans
Achaia
Acroceraunia
Actium
Adherbal
Aduatuci
Aediles
Aedui
Aegátes Islands
Aegyptus
Aemilian Way
Aemilius
Aenéas
Aequians
Aesis, R.
Aetius
Aetna
Aetolians
Afranius
Africa
Africánus
Agendicum
Ager occupátus
Ager privátus
Ager publicus
Ager Románus
Agrarian Laws
Agricola
Agrigentum
Agrippa
Agrippína, daughter of Agrippa
Agrippína, sister of Caligula
Alae
Alans
Alaric
Alba Longa
Alban Lake
Alban Mts.
Alesia
Alexander the Great
Alexandría
Allia
Allies
Alsium
Ambiorix
Amphitheatres
Amulius
Anchíses
Ancóna
Ancus Marcius
Andes
Andriscus
Anio, R.
Anthemius
Antiochus III.
Antiochus IV.
Antium
Antonia
Antonius
Antonínus, Marcus Aurelius
Antonínus Pius
Antony
Aóus, R.
Apennines
Apollo, worship of
Apollonia
Apollonius
Appeal, right of
Appian Way
Appius Claudius, Decemvir
Appius Claudius, father-in-law of Gracchus
Appius Claudius Caecus
Appuleian Laws
Apsus, R.
Apulia
Aqua Claudia
Aquae Sextiae
Aqueducts
Aquileia
Aquínum
Aquitáni
Arabia
Arabia Petraea
Arcadius
Archeláus
Arches
Archimédes
Ardea
Argos
Aricia
Ariminum
Ariobarzánes
Ariovistus
Aristobúlus
Armenia
Arminius
Armor
Army
Arnus
Arpi
Arpínum
Arretium
Arsanias, R.
Aryan Race
Ascanius
Asculum in Apulia
Asia
Assyria
Aternus
Athens
Athesis
Atrium
Attalus II.
Attalus III.
Attila
Aufidus, R.
Augurs
Augustan Age
Augusta Taurinórum
Augusti
Augustus
Aulerci
Aurelia
Aurelian
Aurelian Way
Aurelius, M. Antonínus
Avaricum
Averni
Avernus, Lake

Baeculae
Baetis, R.
Baiae
Basilicae
Basilica Julia
Bathing
Baths
Bellovaci
Beneventum
Bibracte
Bibulus
Bithynia
Bocchus
Boian Gauls
Bononia
Books
Bovillae
Brennus
Bridge, Rhine
Bridge, Tiber
Britain
Britannia
Britannicus
Brittany
Brundisium
Bruttium
Brutus, nephew of Tarquin
Brutus
Brutus, Decimus Junius
Brutus, Marcus
Burgundians
Burrhus
Byzantium

Cabíra
Caecína
Caepio
Caere
Caesar, Gaius Julius
Caesar, Lucius Julius
Caesars
Caícus
Calabria
Calceus
Caledonians
Calendar
Caligula
Calpurnia
Calpurnian Law
Camarína
Camerínum
Camillus
Campania
Campus Martius
Candles
Cannae
Canuleian Law
Canuleius
Canusium
Capéna
Capitoline Hill
Capitolium
Cappadocia
Capreae
Capua
Caracalla
Carrhae
Carthage
Carthaginians
Carthágo Nova
Carus
Casca
Casilínum
Cassius.
Cassivelaunus
Catalonia
Catana
Catiline
Cato, the elder
Cato, the younger
Catullus
Catulus, father of the Senate
Catulus, Gaius Lutatius
Caudine Forks
Caudium
Celtibéri
Celts
Cenománi
Censors
Centuries
Centurions
Ceres
Cerialia
Cethégus
Chaeronéa
Chalcédon
Chalons
Christians
Cicero, Marcus Tullius
Cicero, Quintus Tullius
Cilicia
Cimber
Cimbri
Cincinnátus
Cineas
Cinna
Circeii
Circeium, Promontory
Circus
Circus Maximus
Citizenship
City walls
Claudian Emperors
Claudius, Emperor
Claudius, Publius
Cleopátra
Clients
Cloáca Maxima
Clodion
Clodius
Clupea
Clusium
Coena
Cohors Praetoria
Collatínus
Colonies, Latin
Colonies, Maritime
Colonies, Military.
Comitia Centuriáta
Comitia Curiáta
Comitia Tribúta
Comitium
Colosséum
Colossus
Column of Trajan
Columna Milliaria
Columns
Commodus
Constans
Constantine the Great
Constantine II.
Constantinople
Constantius I.
Constantius II.
Conscripti, Patres
Consuls
Consus
Cora
Corcýra
Corduba
Corfinium
Corinth
Coriolánus
Corioli
Corn laws
Cornelia, daughter of Cinna
Cornelia, daughter of Metellus Scipio
Cornelia, daughter of Scipio Africánus
Corsica
Cotta
Council of Nice
Court-houses
Courts
Crassus, the Triumvir
Crassus, son of the Triumvir
Cremóna
Crete
Croton
Cumae
Cures
Curia
Curiae
Curio.
Curtius
Curule Aedile
Curule chair
Curule offices
Cynoscephalae
Cyprus
Cyrenaica

Dacia
Damophilus
Deal
Debts, Debtors
Decemvirs
Decius, Emperor
Decius, Publius
Decree of the Senate
Deiotarus
Dentátus
Dependent Communities
Dictator
Diocletian
Dolabella
Domitian
Domitius.
Drepana
Dress
Drusus, Germanicus
Drusus, Marcus Livius
Duilius
Duoviri Sacrórum
Dyrrachium

Eburónes
Ecnomus
Edict of Milan
Editor.
Education
Egesta
Egnatius
Egypt
Elba
Elections
Enipeus, R.
Enna
Ennius
Epidamnus
Epiphanes
Epírus
Equites
Eryx
Etruria
Etruscans
Eudoxia
Eugenius
Eunus
Euphrátes
Examination Papers

Fabii
Fabius, Cunctátor
Fabius Quintus
Fabius Vibulánus
Fabricius
Faesulae
Farming the revenues
Fauces
Faustulus
Festivals
Fetiales
Five Good Emperors
Flamen Diális
Flamines
Flaminian Way
Flaminínus
Flaminius
Flavian Emperors
Floors
Florentia
Foreigners resident at Rome
Formiae
Forum
Forum Boarium
Forum Caesaris
Forum Holitorium
Forum Julii, in Gaul
Forum Julii, in Venetia
Forum Suarium
Forum of Trajan
Forum of Vespasian
Franks
Freedmen
Fundi
Funerals
Furniture

Gabii
Gabinius
Gabínus
Gades
Galatia
Galba, Emperor
Galba, Servius
Galerius
Gallia Cisalpína
Gallia Narbonensis
Gaul
Gauls
Games
Gela
Genabum
Gens, Gentes
Genseric
Genua
Genucius
Gergovia
Germanicus, Drusus
Germanicus, son of Drusus Germ.
Germans
Glabrio
Gladiators
Glass
Glaucia
Golden House of Nero
Good Emperors
Gordian
Goths
Gracchi
Gracchus, Gains
Gracchus, Tiberius (senior)
Gracchus, Tiberius
Gratian
Greece
Greek Empire

Hadrian
Hadrumétum
Hamilcar Barca
Hannibal, son of Gisco
Hannibal, son of Hamilcar
Hanno
Hasdrubal, son-in-law of Hamilcar
Hasdrubal, brother of Hannibal
Hasdrubal, son of Gisco
Helena
Heliogabalus
Helvetii
Heracléa
Herculaneum
Herméan Promontory
Hiempsal
Hiero II.
Hieronymus
Hirtius
Hispania Citerior
Hispania Ulterior
Honorius
Horace
Horatius Codes
Hortensius, Quintus
Hortensius, the Orator
Homesteads
Houses
Huns
Hyrcánus

Iapygia
Iapygians
Ibérus, R.
Icilius
Igilium
Ilerda
Illyrican War
Illyricum
Ilva
Imperator
Imperium
Intermarriage
Interest
Interrex
Isara, R.
Isauria
Isthmian Games
Italians
Italy
Iúlus

Janiculum
Janus
Jentaculum
Jerusalem
Jews
Joséphus
Jovian
Juba
Judaea
Jugurtha
Julia, daughter of Caesar
Julia, daughter of Augustus
Julian Emperors
Julian the Apostate
Julian Law
Juliánus
Juno
Jupiter
Juries
Justin Martyr
Juvenal

Kaeso, Quinctius
King of Rome
Knights.

Labiénus
Lacerna
Lacinian Promontory
Laevínus
Laevínus, Marcus
Lamps
Land-owners, classes of
Lanistae
Lanuvium
Lares
Last of the Romans
Latin Confederacy
Latínus
Latium
Latóna
Laurentum
Lavinia
Lavinium
Legáti
Leges Juliae
Legion
Lentulus
Leontíni
Lepidus, Consul
Lepidus, Triumvir
Leptis
Lesbos
Letter-writing
Lex de Repetundis
Licinian Rogations
Licinius
Liger
Lights
Liguria
Lilybaeum
Lipara Islands
Liris, R.
Literature
Livia
Livilla
Livius
Locri
Longínus
Luca
Lucan
Lucania
Luceres
Luceria
Lucilius
Lucretia
Lucretius
Lucullus
Lupercalia
Luperci
Lupercus
Lupus
Lycia

Macedonia
Macedonian War
Macrínus
Maecénas
Maenius
Magister Equitum
Magna Graecia
Magnesia
Mago
Majestas
Majorian
Mamertines
Mancínus
Manilian Law
Manilius
Manlius, Marcus
Manlius Capitolínus
Mantua
Marcellus
Marcellus, nephew of Augustus
Marius,
Marriage
Mars
Martial
Masinissa.
Massilia
Mauretania
Mausoléum of Augustus
Mausoléum of Hadrian
Maximian
Maximin
Maximus I.
Maximus II.
Meals
Mediolánum
Memmius
Menenius Agrippa
Mesopotamia
Messalína
Messána
Metapontum
Metaurus, R.
Metellus Macedonicus
Metellus Nepos
Metellus Numidicus
Metellus Pius
Micipsa
Milan, Edict of
Milétus
Military Tribunes
Milliarium Aureum
Milo
Minerva
Minturnae
Minucius
Mithradátes
Mityléne
Moesia
Money brokers
Mons Sacer
Moors
Mucra, R.
Mummius
Munda
Municipia
Muthul
Mutina
Mylae
Mysia

Names
Naples
Naulochus
Navy
Nepos
Nero, Consul
Nero, Emperor
Nerva
Nervii
Nicaea
Nicomédes
Nobles
Nola
Noricum
Novus Homo
Numantia
Numantian War
Numa Pompilius
Numidia
Numitor
Nursia

Octavia, sister of Augustus
Octavia, wife of Nero
Octavius
Odoácer
Offices and officers
Ops
Orchomenos
Osca
Ostia
Ostium
Ostrogoths
Otho
Ovation
Ovid

Padua (Patavium)
Palatine
Pales, Palilia
Palmýra
Pannonia
Panormus
Pantheon
Parma
Parthia, Parthians
Pater-familias
Patres
Patrician
Patricians
Patrons
Paullus
Pelusium
Penátes
Pergamum
Peristylium
Perperna
Perseus
Persius
Pertinax
Petreius
Phaedrus
Pharnaces
Pharsalia, Pharsálus
Philip, Emperor
Philip of Macedonia
Philippi
Philippics
Philopoemen
Phoenicia
Picénum
Picts'
Pirates
Pisae
Pisaurum
Piso
Placentia
Plautian-Papirian Law
Plautus
Plebeians
Plebiscita
Pliny, the elder
Pliny, the younger
Pollio
Polybius
Polycarp
Pomoerium
Pompeia
Pompeii
Pompeius, Gnaeus
Pompeius, Sextus
Pompey the Great
Pomptine Marshes
Pontifices
Pontius
Pontus
Poppaea Sabína
Porsena
Postumius
Potestas
Praefect
Praefectúrae
Praeneste
Praetor
Praetorian Guard
Praetorium
Prandium
Private Lands
Private Rights
Probus
Proconsul
Propertius
Propraetor
Provinces
Provincial System
Prusias
Ptolemy, brother of Cleopátra
Ptolemy of Cyprus
Ptolemy V., Epiphanes
Ptolemy Alexander
Publicani
Public Lands
Public Rights
Publilian Law, Publilius
Punic Wars
Puteoli
Pydna
Pyrrhus

Quaestors
Quinctius Cincinnátus
Quinctius, Kaeso
Quintilian
Quirínal
Quirinalia

Radagaisus
Ramnes
Ravenna
Reáte
Reforms of Caesar
Reforms of Sulla
Regillus, Lake
Regulus
Remi
Remus
Rents
Republic
Rhaetia
Rhea Silvia
Rhegium
Rhodes
Ricimer
Roads
Roman Empire
Romans
Rome
Rome, Hills of
Romulus
Roscius
Rostra
Rubicon
Rutilius

Sabines
Sabis, R.
Sacred Mount
Sacredness of Officials
Sagum
Saguntum
Salernum
Salii
Sallust
Samnites
Samnite Wars
Samnium
Samos
Sardinia
Sardis
Saturn
Saturnalia
Saturnínus
Scaevola
Scarpheia
Scipio, Gnaeus
Scipio, Consul 218 B. C.
Scipio Africánus, the elder
Scipio Africánus, the younger
Scipio Asiaticus
Scipio, Metellus
Scipio Nasíca
Scribonia
Segesta
Sejánus
Seleucia
Selínus
Sempronia
Sempronius
Sena Gallica
Senate
Senones
Sentínum
Sequani
Sertorius
Servian Reform
Servile War
Servilius
Servius Tullius
Setia
Sevérus, Alexander
Sevérus, Septimius
Sevérus III.
Sewers
Sextus Lateránus
Sextus, son of Tarquin
Ships
Sibylline Books
Sicily
Silver Age
Silvius Procas
Sinuessa
Slaves.
Social War
Soleae
Solon
Sophonisba
Soracte, Mt.
Sosigenes
Spain
Sparta
Spartacus
Spoletium
Spurius Cassius
Standards
Statius
Stilicho
Stola
Strongyle Islands
Suessiónes
Sueves, Suevi
Sulla
Sulmo
Sulpicius Galba
Sulpicius Rufus
Sutrium
Sybaris
Syphax
Syracuse
Syria

Tablinum
Tacitus, Emperor
Tacitus, Historian
Tarentum.
Tarquinii
Tarquinius Priscus
Tarquinius Superbus
Tarracína
Tarragóna
Tauromenium
Tax-gatherers
Teánum
Telamon
Tellilia, Tellus
Temple of Aesculapius
Temple of Apollo Palatínus
Temple of Ceres
Temple of Concordia
Temple of Diána
Temple of Janus
Temple of Juno
Temple of Jupiter
Temple of Mars
Temple of Peace
Tenth Legion, revolt of
Terence
Terentilius, Terentilian Rogations
Teutoberger Forest
Teutones
Thala
Thapsus
Theatre
Theatre of Balbus
Theatre of Marcellus
Theatre of Pompey
Theodosius
Thermae
Thermus
Thessaly
Thirty Tyrants
Thurii
Tibullus
Tibur
Tiberius
Ticínus, R.
Tigellínus
Tigránes
Time, mode of reckoning
Tities
Titus
Tivoli
Toga
Torquátus
Trajan
Trasiménus, Lake
Trebia, R.
Trebonius
Tribes
Tribunes
Tribúni Militum
Tribútum
Triclinium
Trigánum
Trinacria
Triumphal Arches
Triumphal Procession
Triumvirate, First
Triumvirate, Second,
Tullia, daughter of Servius Tullius
Tullus Hostilius
Tunica
Tunis
Tusculum
Twelve Caesars
Twelve Tables
Tyndaris

Umbria, Umbrians
Utica

Vadimónis, Lake
Valens
Valentinian I.
Valentinian II.
Valentinian III.
Valerius, Valerio-Horatian Laws
Valerius, Caesar's Lieutenant
Valero Publilius
Vandals
Varro, Consul at Cannae
Varro, Pompey's Lieutenant
Varus
Veii, Veientes
Velítrae
Veneti
Venetia
Venice
Venusia
Vercellae
Vercingetorix
Verginius
Veróna
Verres
Verus, Annius
Verus, Lucius
Vespasian
Vesta.
Vestal Virgins
Vestibulum
Vesuvius, Mt.
Veto
Veturius
Via Aemilia
Via Appia
Via Aurelia
Via Flaminia
Via Latína
Via Sacra
Vienna
Villius
Virgil
Virginia, Virginius
Viriáthus
Visigoths
Vitellius
Volaterrae
Volsci
Volsinii
Volturnus
Voting
Vulso

Windows
Writing
Written Code of Laws

York

Zama
Zela
Zeno
Zenobia
Zeugma
Zeugma





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of History of Rome from the Earliest
times down to 476 AD, by Robert F. Pennell

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY OF ROME TO 476 AD. ***

This file should be named 8rome10.txt or 8rome10.zip
Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks get a new NUMBER, 8rome11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, 8rome10a.txt

This eBook was produced by Lynn Bonnett and especially to Teresa Thomason
of the Special Collections Department, Milner Library, Illinois State
University, Normal, IL, who helped to clarify a portion of the text.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*

